Title	Section	Description
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)	Description	"Alfalfa is an excellent forage crop when harvested and stored properly. However, the plant can cause ""hepatogenous photosensitivity syndrome"" if water-damaged (Monlux AW . J Am Vet Med Assoc, Vol. 142, 9, p. 989-994, 1963). "
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)	Distribution	"Alfalfa is commonly cultivated for animal feed, and instances of it growing in the wild often occur near areas where it is purposefully cultivated. Midwestern states where it is commonly found include Illinois, Tennessee, and Alabama, but it is also found in western states like Colorado and New Mexico."
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Consuming fresh alfalfa can cause cause bloating in cattle and sheep. Additionally, ""saponins found in alfalfa limit its use for swine and poultry."" (Source: Cornell University Plants Poisonous to Livestock) "
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)	Control	"Limit your livestock's intake of alfalfa, and ensure that you're not feeding them moldy or damp feed. "
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)	Toxic Principle	All parts of the plant. The primary poisons are canavanine and saponins.
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)	Clinical Signs	Fresh alfalfa can cause bloating in cows.
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, chickens, sheep, horses"
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)	References Used	http://powo.science.kew.org/taxon/urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:30234961-2#distribution-map
Bloodroot or Red Puccoon (Sanguinaria canadensis L.)	Description	"Bloodroot is a low, glabrous, stemless perennial herb. It has extensively branched rhizomes, and each growing tip produces a flower stem and a leaf that is palmately lobed with 5 to 7 lobes. The flower appears from March to May, rolled in a single leaf. The white-to-pink flower has 8-12 oblong petals and numerous golden yellow stamens. The flower is initially taller than the leaf, but as it turns to fruit, the leaf unfolds and flattens to shade the fruit. The root has reddish-orange sap.    "
Bloodroot or Red Puccoon (Sanguinaria canadensis L.)	Distribution	Bloodroot grows throughout the mid to eastern states of the U.S. east of the Mississippi and from southern Canada to the northern half of Louisiana and Georgia. It is found in most counties of Illinois in moist but well-drained woodland soil. 
Bloodroot or Red Puccoon (Sanguinaria canadensis L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	All parts of the plant are poisonous but the toxins are most highly concentrated in the root after leaves are completely open. The active alkaloid levels vary greatly between regions as well as populations. 
Bloodroot or Red Puccoon (Sanguinaria canadensis L.)	Toxic Principle	"The red-colored latex from this plant contains several alkaloids similar to those found in the Opium Poppy, and include sanguinarine, chelerythrine, protopine, and homochelidonine, as well as resins. "
Bloodroot or Red Puccoon (Sanguinaria canadensis L.)	Clinical Signs	"Symptoms of bloodroot poisoning include nausea, vomiting, faintness, dizziness, dilated pupils, fainting, diarrhea, and heart failure. Poisoning can be fatal."
Bloodroot or Red Puccoon (Sanguinaria canadensis L.)	Animals Affected	Goats
Bloodroot or Red Puccoon (Sanguinaria canadensis L.)	References Used	"Burrows, George E., & Tyrl, Ronald J. (2013). Toxic plants of North America. Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell."
Bloodroot or Red Puccoon (Sanguinaria canadensis L.)	References Used	https://plants.ces.ncsu.edu/plants/all/sanguinaria-canadensis/
Bouncing Bet (Saponaria officinalis L.)	Description	"Bouncing bet is an herbaceous perennial which grows from rhizomes. Its close relative, cow cockle (Saponaria vaccaria L.), is an annual. It grows to be 1-3 feet tall. The stems are erect and jointed with opposite elliptic leaves which are 3-4 inches long and 1/2 to 1-1/2 inches wide at the middle. The leaf margins lack teeth."
Bouncing Bet (Saponaria officinalis L.)	Description	"The flowers come in clusters of cylindric sepals and bloom from June to September, displaying 5-6 petals notched at the apex. Petal colors range from white to pink. The fruit is a capsule about 1 inch long and 1/4 inch thick containing many somewhat round black seeds. The seeds have minute bumps on the surface."
Bouncing Bet (Saponaria officinalis L.)	Distribution	"Originally from Europe, bouncing bet and the related species, cow cockle (Saponaria vaccaria L.), grow in open unused areas, along roadsides and railroad tracks, and waste grounds throughout the U.S. Bouncing bet is found in nearly all counties of Illinois, while cow cockle is limited only to scattered counties in northern and central Illinois. Bouncing bet and cow cockle are considered weeds, although they are attractive plants."
Bouncing Bet (Saponaria officinalis L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"The abundance of bouncing bet along roadsides and in other wastelands makes it easily accessible to animals allowed to graze in such places. Although the entire plant is poisonous, the seeds contain the largest concentration of the toxic principle."
Bouncing Bet (Saponaria officinalis L.)	Control	"Screenings of grain should be checked for large quantities of Saponaria seeds. Animals tend to avoid contaminated feed because the plants apparently are distasteful. Animals should not be grazed where Saponaria species is abundant, especially when the pasture grasses are present in short supply or are exceedingly dry. "
Bouncing Bet (Saponaria officinalis L.)	Toxic Principle	"Bouncing Bet contains large amounts of saponins, which froth when extracted with water. The saponins are soluble in water and alcohol. The sapotoxins of these saponins are similar or identical to those of corn cockle (Agrostemma Githago). Hydrolysis of the saponins yields sugars and sapogonins, a group of physiologically active substances."
Bouncing Bet (Saponaria officinalis L.)	Toxic Principle	The toxic material is contained in highest concentration in the seeds. Most animals refuse to eat the seeds and avoid grains or screenings containing them. Feeding of the plant itself to sheep in an amount of 3% of the body weight caused death within 4 hours; the plant weight being expressed on a dry-weight basis.
Bouncing Bet (Saponaria officinalis L.)	Clinical Signs	"Poisoning caused by bouncing bet is usually mild, as animals tend to avoid the feed that contains this plant. The poison irritates the digestive tract and may cause vomiting, signs suggestive of nausea, and diarrhea. Slowed or rapid breathing as well as unsteadiness, ataxia and coma also are associated with poisoning by this plant."
Bouncing Bet (Saponaria officinalis L.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, sheep, horses"
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Description	"Bracken fern is a typical fern. Its large triangular fronds are divided into three main parts with each part bipinnately subdivided. These fronds are 2 to 4 feet long by 1 to 3 feet wide. They are borne at the tips of erect, rigid, straw-colored, smooth stalks 1 to 3 feet tall. The stalks rise at intervals from stout black underground rootstocks sometimes a yard or more long."
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Description	"Spores are borne in late summer at the edges on the lower sides of mature fronds, and the edges fold under to form the spore cover. The rootstocks also spread the fern."
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Distribution	"Many varieties of bracken fern are found throughout the U.S., particularly in dry pastures and meadows, abandoned fields, and open woods on sandy and gravelly soil. In Illinois it may be a pest throughout the northern third of the state."
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Distribution	"Even when there is no bracken fern in the open pastures, it may be growing in the fencerows and along roadsides, where animals may browse it when other forage is scarce."
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Conditions of Poisoning	"In dry, hot seasons or in late summer to early fall, when succulent herbage is scarce, animals more often eat bracken, although they generally avoid it at other times. Also, if hay is cut from bracken fern-infested meadows and fed, poisoning may result. Both cattle and horses are susceptible to bracken fern poisoning. Sheep and swine rarely eat bracken fern, but exposed swine (at least) may sometimes experience a thiaminase-mediated syndrome."
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Control	"Especially during dry periods, animals should be kept out of bracken fern-infested pastures. Hay from infested meadows should not be used for feed or bedding. Generally bracken fern should be eliminated from pastures and hayfields. Large infestations of bracken fern may be reduced gradually by pulling or mowing the fronds twice a year (in June and August) or by fertilizing and liming infested areas. "
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Toxic Principle	"Thiaminase from bracken fern especially affects horses and pigs but not cattle. Ptaquiloside affects cattle and sheep and causes bone marrow damage. Other toxic principles that affect cattle are: aplastic anemia factor, and hematuria causing factor. "
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Clinical Signs	Bracken fern poisoning affects the cow and the horse differently with regard to both clinical signs of illness and tissue damage. Consumption of the plant may also affect the flavor and odor of the milk produced by the animal.
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Clinical Signs	In cattle:
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Clinical Signs	"After feeding on bracken fern for several to many days, cattle often sicken rather suddenly and, contrary to their reaction to most types of plant poisoning, they may show a very high fever. Major effects of bracken fern poisoning in cattle are related to damage to the blood forming elements (decreases production of white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets) and sometimes to urinary tract carcinogenesis. Clinical signs may include rapid loss of body weight, difficult breathing, excessive salivation, bleeding from the nose, blood in the droppings, and congested, hemorrhagic, or icteric (jaundiced or yellowish) mucous membranes may also be observed. Bracken fern poisoning has been mistaken for anthrax and other infectious diseases of cattle."
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Clinical Signs	In horses:
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Clinical Signs	"The first clinical signs of bracken fern poisoning in horses are usually an unsteady gait, a ""tucked up"" appearance of the flanks, nervousness, timidity, congestion of the visible mucous membranes, and constipation. Later, the horse may stand with legs spread, walking with a staggering gait, and occasionally fall, especially if its head is raised suddenly. The appetite may remain normal. Dilated pupils and both increased and decreased heart action have been reported in cases of equine bracken fern poisoning. If not treated, death occurs in 2-10 days, though some horses occasionally survive up to 30 days or more after onset of poisoning."
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	Animals Affected	"Horse, cattle, sheep, swine"
Bracken Fern or Brake Fern (Pteridium aquilinum)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
Buckeye or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus glabra Willd.)	Description	"A tree which reaches a maximum height of 50-70 feet with a rough bark that has disagreeable odor. The leaves are made up of 5 rather large, leaf-like leaflets set like the fingers or a hand, at the end of the leafstalk."
Buckeye or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus glabra Willd.)	Description	Blossoms: Large clusters of pale yellowish-green blossoms appear at the ends of the branches. They are usually seen in May after the leaves appear.
Buckeye or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus glabra Willd.)	Description	"Fruit: A globular, spine-roughened capsule which contains 1-3 large glossy chocolate-colored nuts each with a large whitish scar. "
Buckeye or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus glabra Willd.)	Distribution	"The buckeye grows in woods throughout Illinois, preferring rich, moist soils. In the northern part of the state it is infrequent. Southward it is more common, but nowhere in Illinois does it occur other than as an occasional tree. "
Buckeye or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus glabra Willd.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Sprouts, leaves, and nuts of the plant are reported to have caused illness or death in cattle, sheep, and pigs when these animals were pastured where sprouts were present and where other forage was scarce. Especially poisonous are the young sprouts and the seeds. Poisoning does not always follow when animals feed on the tree. In experimental feeding, symptoms of poisoning appeared in only a small number of the animals."
Buckeye or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus glabra Willd.)	Control	"Until grass or other forage is abundant, animals should not be allowed to graze in woodland pastures where there are buckeye sprouts. Sprouts and seedlings should be grubbed out of pastures. If the trees are few, as they usually are, it may be advisable to collect the nuts in order to keep hogs from getting them. The tree has little commercial value, but since it is uncommon, it should not be unnecessarily destroyed. "
Buckeye or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus glabra Willd.)	Toxic Principle	"Glycosides, especially a glycosidic saponin called aesculin and possibly a narcotic alkaloid. Note: Glycoside is defined as a molecule containing a carbohydrate (sugar) moiety, particularly any such natural product in plants."
Buckeye or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus glabra Willd.)	Clinical Signs	"In simple stomached animals, vomiting and gastroenteritis are the primary effects of the toxic glycoside."
Buckeye or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus glabra Willd.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, sheep, pigs, goats"
Buckeye or Horse Chestnut (Aesculus glabra Willd.)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
Buttercup (Ranunculus spp.)	Description	"The small-flowered buttercup is an erect, often widely branched smooth herb with a hollow stem. It grows 6 inches to 2 feet tall. It has two kinds of leaves: petioled basal leaves that are roundish and have scalloped edges, and alternately placed stem leaves that are stalkless, deeply divided, and made up of about 5 narrow lobes, often 3-pointed. Its flowers are yellow, are 1/4 inch wide or less, and have 5 petals, which are shorter than the 5 green sepals. After the flowers wither, numerous seeds form globose heads at the tops of the flower stalks."
Buttercup (Ranunculus spp.)	Description	"The cursed buttercup (Ranunculus sceleratus L.) is similar to the small-flowered buttercup but has divided basal leaves. Its stems are hollow. The hooked buttercup (Ranunculus recurvatus Poir.), so-named because of its hook-tipped seeds, has long yellow petals that form a flower 1 inch wide. The swamp buttercup (R. septentrionalis Poir.) has 3-lobed leaves and bright-yellow flowers 1 inch or more wide. "
Buttercup (Ranunculus spp.)	Distribution	"The buttercups named above occur as frequent to common plants throughout the state. The small-flowered buttercup, often a troublesome weed, may be found in any location that is not very sandy or wet. The cursed buttercup is limited to the northern third of the state, where it may be abundant in ditches and springy places as well as in ponds. The swamp buttercup grows in wet woods everywhere in the state."
Buttercup (Ranunculus spp.)	Distribution	"Several other kinds of buttercups, less abundant or less widely distributed, may be seen in other habitats or from place to place. The tall buttercup (Ranunculus acris L.), to which poisoning of stock is commonly attributed, occurs in northern and central Illinois as a plant introduced locally along highways and railroads. "
Buttercup (Ranunculus spp.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Buttercups generally inhabit moist areas. Animals allowed to graze in woods, in wet meadows, and by ditches and streams browse the buttercups with other succulent plants. All animals are susceptible to buttercup poisoning, but cows are most often poisoned. Dried buttercups, however, are not poisonous; therefore animals can be fed buttercup-infested hay without danger. "
Buttercup (Ranunculus spp.)	Control	"Animals should not be grazed in pastures heavily infested with buttercups, especially when other herbage is scant or dry. Buttercups are hard to destroy because of their tendency to inhabit moist and wet places. Mowing the plants each year before they produce seed will tend to keep them from increasing and may eventually destroy them. "
Buttercup (Ranunculus spp.)	Toxic Principle	"Ranunculus spp. contain the glycoside, ranunculin from which the poisonous principle, protoanemonin is released when the plant is crushed by virtue of enzymatic action which is activated by crushing. Protoanemonin is a volatile, yellow oil with a lactone moiety which is extremely prone to undergo spontaneous polymerization to yield the innocuous anemonin. Protoanemonin is a bitter tasting oil. "
Buttercup (Ranunculus spp.)	Clinical Signs	"Buttercup poisoning causes cows to give less milk and may cause the milk to be bitter and red tinted. Severe poisoning brings on colic and diarrhea, with black foul-odored feces, nervousness, twitching of the ears and lips, difficult breathing, and eventually convulsions. The symptoms shown by horses and sheep are similar, but poisoned sheep are likely to fall suddenly. Pigs suspected of tall-buttercup poisoning have shown paralysis but not much digestive disorder. "
Buttercup (Ranunculus spp.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, goats, horses"
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Description	"Castor bean is a herbaceous annual which can reach to nearly 15 feet tall when growing in open spaces in warm climates. Large leaves are alternate, palmately lobed with 5-11 toothed lobes. Leaves are glossy and often red or bronze tinted when young. Flowers appear in clusters at the end of the main stem in late summer. The fruit consists of an oblong spiny pod which contains three seeds on average. Seeds are oval and light brown, mottled or streaked with light and dark brown and resemble a pinto bean. The plant itself is fast growing, but the seeds require a long frost-free season in order to mature. "
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Distribution	"Castor bean is native to the tropics (Africa) but is planted as a garden plant throughout the U.S. for its large, striking appearance. It is now commerically grown in the U.S. in Illinois, Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma, Oregon and California. As a result, it is naturalized in the south where winters are mild and most often is found near streambeds, dumping grounds, barnyards or along roadsides."
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Conditions of Poisoning	"All parts of the plants are toxic, but most dangerous are the seeds. The most susceptible animal species include cattle, horses, sheep, pigs, fowl, rabbits and other small animals. Seeds ingested at 0.2% of body weight have caused toxicosis in cattle and 0.01% of body weight was toxic to horses."
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Control	"Castor bean plants are grown largely as commercial and garden plants, and should not be planted in or near livestock enclosures. Plants may appear in the wild in areas of the south where the plant has become naturalized, and animals should not be allowed to graze in areas where the plant grows."
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Toxic Principle	"The principle toxin of castor bean is ricin which is a lectin, also termed a toxalbumin. Ricin may comprise up to 3% of the seed weight. Toxalbumins are very toxic plant-derived compounds that combine carbohydrate and protein moieties or components. Ricin is water soluble and is not present in castor oil. Taken orally, ricin is readily absorbed from the stomach and intestine. Another phytotoxin in castor bean, ricinine, is reportedly goitrogenic, but the significance of this compound is not clearly established."
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Clinical Signs	"Signs appear after a characteristic lag period of a few hours to days, usually between 12 hours and 48 hours. Signs support nausea and include evidence of abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, tenesmus, and dehydration. Additional signs may be anorexia, cessation of rumination, excessive thirst, weakness, muscle twitching, dullness of vision, convulsions, dyspnea, opisthotonus and coma. At postmortem severe inflammation of the stomach and intestine are evident."
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Clinical Signs	"Sometimes convulsions and decreased tendon reflexes are observed. After convulsions, death may result from paralysis of the respiratory center. Artifical respiration may not preserve life for long because of rapid onset of concurrent vasomotor paralysis."
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Clinical Signs	"In ducks, there is an ascending paralysis which may be confused with botulism. Sometimes thousands of ducks as well as geese are poisoned."
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Clinical Signs	"For horses, signs include trembling, sweating, dyspnea, incoordination, vigorous heart contractions, shivering, cold extremities, depression, increased body temperature, weak pulse, constipation or diarrhea, and convulsions."
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Clinical Signs	Cattle may have diarrhea stained with blood.
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Clinical Signs	Pigs have frequent vomiting.
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Clinical Signs	"Poultry show signs of depression, roughened feathers, droopy wings, greyish wattles and combs, and emaciation. Egg production ceases and premature moulting may begin."
Castor Bean (Ricinus communis)	Animals Affected	"Ducks, horses, cattle, pigs, poultry"
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Description	"The cocklebur plant is a coarse herbaceous annual about 3 feet high. They have erect, stout stems and spreading branches that are angled and often red-spotted. The leaves are alternate, rough to the touch, and broadly triangular to heart-shaped. Cockleburs produce two kinds of flowers. One kind, in short terminal branches, produces only pollen; the other kind, in clusters in the axils of the leaves, produces seed. The fruit is a small, hard, 2-chambered bur, oval in shape and about 3/4 inch long. It is covered with strong, hooked spines. This plant reproduces only by means of its seed. "
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Description	"The seedling, the plant's most dangerous stage, is very different from the mature plant. It consists of a slender, straight whitish green stem 1 to 3 inches tall. Capping this stem are two strap-shaped green leaves, each about 1 1/4 inches long and l/4 inch wide. Leaves produced after these first leaves gradually assume the characteristic shape of those of the mature plant. Proof of the identity of young seedlings may be found in their attachment underground to the easily recognized burs from which they sprout."
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Distribution	"Cockleburs occur throughout Illinois and the rest of the U.S. as stray plants in waste places, cornfields, pastures, and along roadsides, fencerows, stream banks, the beds of dry ponds, and previously flooded land along streams and rivers. Pastures and meadows may be heavily infested, especially with the seedling stage as the result of the burs having been washed in from adjoining fields."
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Pigs rooting and grazing in cocklebur infested places are the most often poisoned domestic species, with those weighing between 20-50 pounds being the most susceptible. Poisoning also affects cattle, sheep, horses, and fowl."
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"The plant is most hazardous at the seedling stage because of its toxicity as well as palatability. Ingestion of young seedlings in the amount of 0.75% of the animal's weight may result in clinical signs of toxicosis in a few hours and death in 24-48 hours. Approximately 500 seedlings was lethal to a 40-pound pig. The seeds are poisonous at 0.3% of animal weight but are seldom eaten because of their spiny capsule. Occasionally the eating of the ripe spiny capsules is said to result in intestinal obstruction. Mature plants, however, are seldom eaten, perhaps because of their bitterness and rough texture."
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Control	Animals should be kept out of infested grazing grounds and drinking places during late spring and early summer when cocklebur seeds are sprouting. Plants in crop fields and pastures may be removed by hoeing and weeding. Heavily infested places should be mowed before the plants form seeds.
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Toxic Principle	"Carboxyatractyloside, a sulfated glycoside, which is present in high concentrations in the seed and cotyledon, is now believed to be the primary toxic principle. As plants develop past the seedling stage, their toxicity decreases. The seeds and seedlings of cockleburs contain the glucoside xanthostrumarin. Toxicity is not lost on drying."
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Clinical Signs	"Clinical signs usually appear within 2-24 hours after ingestion and may be followed by death within 3 days after the onset of illness. Signs most often include anorexia, reduced responsiveness, vomiting, rapid weak pulse, dyspnea, muscular weakness, prostration, and spasmodic contraction of leg and neck muscles. Ascites and potentially lethal hypoglycemia may occur."
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Clinical Signs	"Pigs display signs consistent with abdominal pain, and if severely poisoned may show opisthotonos, spasmodic running motions followed by convulsions and death after about 48 hours."
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Clinical Signs	"Cattle may become blind, develop extreme hypersensitivity to external stimuli and prominent convulsions. Calves die acutely, often within 12 hours."
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Clinical Signs	Fowl show markedly reduced response to external stimuli which may be followed by death.
Cockleburs (Xanthium strumarium L.)	Animals Affected	"Pigs, cattle, fowl, rodents"
Crown of Thorns (Euphorbia milii)	Description	"A low-growing evergreen shrub with very thorny grooved stems and branches. The stems are purplish brown and are 1-2 feet tall on average, but can reach 3 feet in a warm climate. The thorns are sharp, pointed and are 1/2 inch long on avarage. The ovate leaves are 1-3 inches long, few in number, and are found mostly at the growing ends. The cyathia, a type of inflorescence characteristic of the genus Euphorbia, are born in small umbels and have showy, ovate and bright red bracts. The small flowers are produced in clusters of 2-8 at the tips of green flower stem about 1 inch long. Genus Euphorbia includes other commonly available plants such as poinsettia (E. pulcherrima) and snow-on-the-mountain (E. marginata)."
Crown of Thorns (Euphorbia milii)	Distribution	"A native of Madagascar, Crown of Thorns is widely grown as a house plant in northern states including Illinois, and as a common garden plant in southern states, especially Florida."
Crown of Thorns (Euphorbia milii)	Conditions of Poisoning	"The poisonous principle is present in all parts of the plant. Euphorbia species generally are highly unpalatable, but animals may eat them due to lack of good forage. Drying does not destroy the toxicity of the plant, and Euphorbia in hay may be slightly more palatable to livestock. Contact with the white, milky sap may cause severe blistering as well as intense pain to open cuts or eyes. Honey made from the flowers of these plants may be toxic."
Crown of Thorns (Euphorbia milii)	Control	"Light infestations of pastures usually are not a problem since most Euphorbia can be grazed to a limited degree without noticeable reactions. Mowing and reseeding with hardy pasture plants is helpful for heavier infestations of Euphorbia, since most pasture species are annuals; light restocking rates also may help increase the predominance of desirable forage species. Supplemental feeding is suggested in some areas when desirable forage is scarce."
Crown of Thorns (Euphorbia milii)	Toxic Principle	The poisonous principles have been identified as phorbol esters. Phorbol esters activate protein kinase C. Protein phosphorylation is increased by protein kinase C which may alter multiple enzyme and other protein functions. Effects may result in cytoskeletal damage and tumor promotion.
Crown of Thorns (Euphorbia milii)	Clinical Signs	"Generally horses, cattle, sheep, cats, dogs and humans are affected by Euphorbia and may experience severe irritation of the mouth and gastrointestinal tract, sometimes with hemorrhage and diarrhea. Other general signs include blistering, swelling about the eyes and mouth, excessive salivation and emesis, abdominal pain and weakness. The sap may cause dermatitis. Death is rare. Work horses may suffer severe blisters and loss of hair on the ankles. Approximately 3 kg of E. prostrata and E. marginata when fed to cattle produces severe scours and emaciation."
Crown of Thorns (Euphorbia milii)	Animals Affected	"Horses, cattle, sheep, cats, dogs"
Daffodil (Narcissus spp.)	Description	"Daffodils are ornamental perennial bulbs, common to the United States. The plant grows from bulbs that are various sizes and shapes. The leaves are long and narrow, and the flowers grow either as single flowers or in clusters of up to 20 flowers. They typically don't have a scent, and are either white, yellow, or orange in color."
Daffodil (Narcissus spp.)	Distribution	Daffodils are found worldwide.
Daffodil (Narcissus spp.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"While the entire plant is toxic, the bulbs are particularly toxic. Consuming the bulb may cause vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and in some cases, cardiac arrhythmia or respiratory depression. "
Daffodil (Narcissus spp.)	Control	"Keep your pets and animals away from daffodil plants and bulbs so they don't accidentally eat them. If they do, contact your veterinarian immediately. "
Daffodil (Narcissus spp.)	Toxic Principle	"At least 15 phenanthridine alkaloids including lycorine, have been identified in the leaves, stems and bulbs of Narcissus. The concentrations of the alkaloids are highest in the outer layers of the bulbs."
Daffodil (Narcissus spp.)	Clinical Signs	"Vomiting, diarrhea, difficulty breathing or swallowing, excess salivation, seizures, dermatitis."
Daffodil (Narcissus spp.)	Animals Affected	"Dogs, cats, horses, humans"
Dogbanes (Apocynum cannabinum L. and other species)	Description	"This is a perennial milky-juiced herb of the Dogbane family. It has opposite leaves which are simple, nearly 5 inches long and about half as wide, with smooth margins."
Dogbanes (Apocynum cannabinum L. and other species)	Distribution	"This weed is scattered throughout the United States in open fields, pastures, along roadsides and streams. Sometimes the plant is cultivated for ornament and for use in medicine."
Dogbanes (Apocynum cannabinum L. and other species)	Conditions of Poisoning	"This plant is reportedly very distasteful and animals usually avoid it, so poisoning is infrequent. It is consumed primarily when other forage is in short supply. Both green and dried dogbane are toxic. Fifteen to thirty grams of green leaves have been reported to cause the death of a horse or a cow. The root of Apocynum cannabinum has been employed therapeutically to ""retard the heart in systole"" and was therefore used for ""dropsy"" and ""heart trouble."""
Dogbanes (Apocynum cannabinum L. and other species)	Control	"Keep animals from grazing along roadsides, in abandoned fields, or in any other areas where dogbanes are growing. Do not cut hay from land infested with dogbanes. Get rid of these plants in all areas in which animals are grazed or from which hay is cut to be used as feed."
Dogbanes (Apocynum cannabinum L. and other species)	Toxic Principle	Cardiac glycosides.
Dogbanes (Apocynum cannabinum L. and other species)	Clinical Signs	"Animals that have eaten appreciable quantities of dogbane show first a rise in body temperature, sweating, and a strong pulse but cold extremities. The pupils of the eyes are usually dilated. The inside of the mouth and nostrils becomes discolored, and later the mouth becomes so sore that the animal refuses food. In spite of this, bowel action may be frequent. Death is likely to follow."
Dogbanes (Apocynum cannabinum L. and other species)	Animals Affected	"Horses, cattle, sheep, cats, dogs, goats"
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Description	"Dutchman's Breeches is a low, delicate herb, with slender leaf stalks and flower stalks, both rising from an underground, scaly bulb. Its lacy leaves are 3-parted and finely divided. The flower stalks are 5 to 10 inches long and bear several nodding blossoms 1/2 to 3/4 inch long. The blossoms are odorless, white, and flattened; their peculiar shape suggests the common name of the plant. Seeds are produced in small spindle-shaped pods."
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Description	"A closely related Dicentra Canadensis (squirrel corn) grows 6-12 inches tall from a horizontal rhizome with small round tubers at the base of the plant. Below ground it has a long rootstock bearing yellowish flattened, orbicular corms. Other than the fact the spurs of D. canadensis are short and not divergent, the two species of Dicentra are very much alike, except that squirrel corn has fragrant flowers."
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Distribution	"Both Dutchman's breeches and squirrel corn occur throughout the state in wooded areas. Dutchman's breeches is in many places abundant, especially on wooded slopes that have well-drained soil and rich deposits of leaf mold. Squirrel corn, although preferring the same habitat, is much rarer."
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Distribution	"Generally Dicentra spp. grow naturally in rich, moist woodlands of eastern to midwestern North America, ranging from New York and southern Ontario to northern Alabama and as far west as eastern Kansas and Nebraska."
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"All parts of the plants are poisonous, and poisoning can occur through ingestion or skin contact. Poisoning generally only occurs after ingesting large amounts of the plant, and skin irritation caused by the plant is minor and quick to fade."
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Control	"Where Dutchman's Breeches is abundant in pastures, keep cows out until other forage is plentiful -- usually late in May. Let sheep graze infested pastures first. Although Dutchman's Breeches is hard to destroy, heavy grazing by sheep is reported to nearly rid woods pastures of this pest."
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Toxic Principle	Isoquinoline alkaloids.
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Clinical Signs	"Eating the leaves and roots produce poisoning similar to that of Bleeding Heart, a common garden plant. The most common symptom of poisoning by Dutchman's breeches and squirrel corn is a staggering gait, which gives the common name staggerweed to both plants. After eating these plants, cows give less milk."
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Clinical Signs	"Experimental feeding of these plants to steers caused sudden trembling which increased in severity, frothing of the mouth, ejection of partially digested stomach contents, and convulsions. The eyes became glassy, and the animals went down and moaned as if in pain. Death from Dutchman's Breeches poisoning is rare, particularly if animals are kept away from the plant after the first symptoms appear."
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Animals Affected	Cattle
Dutchman's Breeches & Squirrel Corn (Dicentra cucullaria (L.) Bernh. & Dicentra canadensis (Goldie) Walp.)	Animals Affected	Cattle
Elderberry (Sambucus canadensis)	Description	"Elderberry plants are a woody shrub growing about 20 feet tall. The stems are filled with a white pith, and the leaves are opposite, pinnately compound, with lance-shaped serrated leaflets. The flowers are in small flat-topped clusters. Each flowers has about five white petals, and are about 4-6 mm in diameter. Elderberry plants also have drooping clusters of dark purple berries."
Elderberry (Sambucus canadensis)	Distribution	"Elderberry can be found throughout the continental United States, but is more common in the eastern to central states. It prefers moist soils and is frequently found in fields, ditches, and wooded areas. It is also cultivated as an ornamental plant or for use as an ingredient in food or as an herbal medicine."
Elderberry (Sambucus canadensis)	Conditions of Poisoning	"All parts of the plant are poisonous to consume, especially if wilted or in regrowth. Some cases of poisoning in humans occur from using the plant as an herbal medication. Toxicity is largely lost when the berries of the plant are cooked or fermented to make foods like jelly or wine."
Elderberry (Sambucus canadensis)	Toxic Principle	Cyanogenic glycoside sambunigrin which is hydrolysed in the rumen by microorganisms to free hydrogen cyanide (HCN). The cyanide blocks the action of cytochrome oxidase that prevents hemoglobin from releasing oxygen to the tissues..
Elderberry (Sambucus canadensis)	Clinical Signs	"An increased heart rate. Increased respiratory rate, panting, open-mouthed breathing, and extreme difficulty breathing. The mucous membranes are bright red. Death results rapidly from asphyxiation. "
Elderberry (Sambucus canadensis)	Animals Affected	"Humans, cattle, sheep, goats"
Elderberry (Sambucus canadensis)	References Used	"Burrows, George E., & Tyrl, Ronald J. (2013). Toxic plants of North America. Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Description	"Ergot is a fungus that lives as a parasite in the blossoms of grasses. When the grass heads are nearly mature, it appears as jumbo grains protruding from the heads. Ergot grains, which are fungus bodies and not seeds, are several to many times the size of the grass seed. They are dark violet to almost black and are curved, hard, and hornlike. Ergot varies in abundance from year to year."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Distribution	"Ergot is well known as a disease of rye. It also attacks many of the wild grasses that grow along roads, in fence rows, woods, meadows, and pastures, and can often be found on wild rye, quack grass, red top, and bromegrass. It occurs throughout Illinois, being more abundant in some years than in others. "
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Animals get ergot either in the grain fed them or by grazing on infected grass. Obtained in either way, ergot may cause acute poisoning if a large quantity is eaten at one time. Also, because the effect of ergot is cumulative, poisoning may develop slowly if lesser quantities are eaten regularly. Experiments have shown, however, that a small amount of ergot is not injurious to dairy cattle that are amply provided with a balanced ration."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Control	"Do not feed grain or hay that contains ergot. Clean contaminated grain before feeding it. Destroy infested hay. Before planting rye, clean the seed thoroughly either by mechanical means or by immersing it in a 25% salt solution. If using the salt solution, skim off ergots as they rise to the top; then wash the rye seed in water to remove the salt; dry, and plant. If wild grasses are infested, burn them to destroy the ergot."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Control	"Besides attacking many kinds of wild grasses, ergot is frequently abundant on rye in rye-fields and on volunteer rye in wheat-fields. Grain from these fields (or screenings used as feed) is very likely to cause poisoning. If there is much ergot in the grain, its effect can be very severe."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Toxic Principle	"The toxic action of ergot is due to the numerous alkaloids (ergotamine, ergocristine, ergonovine, etc.) present in the sclerotia and other components--choline, ACH, histamine, sterols. Over 40 alkaloids have been identified which are derivatives of lysergic acid, some of which are inactive."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Toxic Principle	"The important naturally occurring alkaloids are ergotamine and ergonovine. Of these, ergonovine is more readily absorbed. Both compounds are potent smooth muscle activators. LSD is also derived from ergot, and the smooth muscle contracting activity, although sometimes present, is not always seen. LSD causes depersonalization or hallucinations and may produce toxic psychosis."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Clinical Signs	"Ergot poisoning, often called ergotism, produces two distinct types of clinical signs. Acute poisoning, which results from eating a large amount of ergot at one time, causes muscular trembling, discoordination, convulsions, and painful contraction of the muscles. In fatal cases the animal becomes delirious."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Clinical Signs	"The gangrenous type of poisoning, which follows continued feeding on smaller amounts of ergot, causes the animal to become dull and depressed and to develop gangrene of the tail, feet, ears, or teats. Gangrene may vary from rather simple sores around the coronary band or top of the hoof, in the space between the claws, or on the teats to a loosening of the hoof or the sloughing of a larger part of a limb or of the tail, ears, or teats. Before sloughing occurs, a well-marked line of division can be seen between the healthy and gangrenous tissue, similar to the type of lesion that has been observed in selenium poisoning in such western states as Kansas, Nebraska, and Wyoming."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Clinical Signs	"Nausea, vomiting, colic, and diarrhea may occur in both types of poisoning. Even when none of the above signs of ergotism are apparent, the presence of ergot in feed should be suspected whenever pregnant animals have an otherwise inexplicable tendency to abort."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	Animals Affected	"All animals and humans are susceptible to ergotism, but cattle are often the most affected."
Ergot (Claviceps purpurea (Fr.) Tul.)	References Used	https://beef.unl.edu/cattleproduction/ergot-poisoning-in-cattle
Fireweed (Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrad)	Description	"Fireweed is known by many names including Summer Cypress, Burning Bush, and Mexican Fireweed. Fireweed can be grown in dry drought conditions. In ideal conditions, it grows to six feet high. The plant's stems have many branches with soft, fluffy leaves. The flowers are green and unnoticeable, growing in the axils of the upper leaves. The veins of the leaves, as well as mature stems, are typically red. The stems change to bright red in the fall. "
Fireweed (Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrad)	Distribution	"Fireweed is found throughout the western and northern United States, as well as in much of Canada. It is common along roadsides, the edges of fields, and the edges of waste areas."
Fireweed (Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrad)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Fireweed can affect many biological systems of livestock, including the cardiovascular system, respiratory system, nervous system, renal system, integumentary system, ocular system, and hepatic system. Immature Fireweed is often used in livestock's feed because it has a similar composition to alfalfa. When consumed in large quantities, mature Fireweed can cause nitrate poisoning. "
Fireweed (Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrad)	Control	Individuals should contact their local agriculture extension specialist or county weed specialist for guidance in the best practice for managing Fireweed in their area.  Herbicides tend to be less effective as Fireweed matures; their general effectiveness depends on the size of the dose used and the age of the plant. 
Fireweed (Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrad)	Toxic Principle	"Toxicity of the plant can change depending on growing conditions; more mature plants or plants growing in extreme drought can be more toxic to animals. In general, Fireweed can produce nitrates, sulfates, saponins, and alkaloids. "
Fireweed (Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrad)	Clinical Signs	"Livestock will show different symptoms of Fireweed poisoning depending on the biological system affected. Commons symptoms are difficulty breathing, blindness, depression, kidney failure, and liver disease. In cases of severe nitrate poisoning, livestock can die. "
Fireweed (Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrad)	Animals Affected	"Sheep, horses, cattle"
Fireweed (Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrad)	References Used	https://plants.usda.gov/plantguide/pdf/pg_kosc.pdf
Fireweed (Kochia scoparia (L.) Schrad)	References Used	https://csuvth.colostate.edu/poisonous_plants/Plants/Details/84
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea L.) 	Description	"Foxglove is an erect herb found as a weed or as a cultivated ornamental grown in gardens. It typically grows up to approximately 5 feet tall. The leaves are alternate and the flowers are showy, pink, and bell-shaped. Flowers grow terminally on the stem on elongated racemes."
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea L.) 	Distribution	"Foxglove currently grows in the northwest states of the United States. It prefers rich soils and commonly grows along roadsides, fences, in open clearings in the woods, and in unused areas."
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea L.) 	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poisoning occurs when the plant is eaten. Livestock are infrequently poisoned, but will eat the plant occasionally either fresh or in hay. The plant remains toxic when dried."
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea L.) 	Control	"Do not allow animals to graze in areas where foxglove is present. The plant can be removed by pulling it from the ground, although you should be careful to remove all roots and to not shake seeds onto the surrounding soil. Use a waste bag to hold the removed plants to further contain the seeds. Process may take multiple seasons to remove all traces of foxglove from the area."
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea L.) 	Toxic Principle	"Cardiac glycosides such as digoxin, digitonin, and digitoxin are in all parts of the plant. "
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea L.) 	Clinical Signs	"Symptoms of poisoning include dizziness, vomiting, diarrhea (possibly bloody), irregular heart beat, weakness, stupor, and delirium or hallucinations. Poisoning can be fatal."
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea L.) 	Animals Affected	All animals and humans are susceptible to varying degrees.
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea L.) 	References Used	"Burrows, George E., & Tyrl, Ronald J. (2013). Toxic plants of North America. Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell."
Ground Ivy (Glechoma hederacea L.)	Description	"Ground ivy is a low, prostrate perennial herb with slender 4-sided stems that hug the ground, root at their joints, and often cover areas of many square feet. Its leaves, two at a joint, are raised on slender stalks. They are roundish and have scallop-like teeth on their margins. Its small bluish flowers, found in the axils of the leaves, appear from April to May and even into July."
Ground Ivy (Glechoma hederacea L.)	Distribution	"Ground ivy, sometimes called Creeping Charlie, is a common weed of moist shaded places and is to be found in fence rows, about farmsteads, and in woodland pastures, gardens, and wastelands. It is also frequent near streams and ditches. A native of Europe, it has become a common plant throughout Illinois. "
Ground Ivy (Glechoma hederacea L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Ground-ivy poisoning is rare, probably because most animals do not like the bitter taste of the plant. Horses, the animals usually affected, are poisoned only after eating large quantities of the plant, either green or dried in hay."
Ground Ivy (Glechoma hederacea L.)	Control	"Reasonable care should be taken not to graze animals in areas that are heavily infested with ground ivy, particularly at times when other herbage is dry or scarce. Neither should hay be made in meadows where the plant is abundant. Ground ivy should be regarded as a weed and destroyed in all places where it is a danger to animals. It is easily destroyed by cultivation."
Ground Ivy (Glechoma hederacea L.)	Toxic Principle	"Like other members of the mint family, ground ivy contains a volatile, aromatic oil. It also contains a bitter substance of unknown chemical constitution. It is collected as a drug plant and is used medicinally in small amounts as a stimulant and tonic. "
Ground Ivy (Glechoma hederacea L.)	Clinical Signs	"After having eaten large amounts of ground ivy, poisoned animals, especially horses, slobber and sweat, and the pupils of their eyes become dilated. They pant for breath as if from overstimulation. Such poisoning is rarely fatal."
Ground Ivy (Glechoma hederacea L.)	Animals Affected	Horses
Hemp (Cannabis sativa)	Description	"Hemp is a rough, odorous herb with few or no branches and angular stems that are covered in short, stiff hairs. Resources differ regarding the size of the plant, but the reported range can be from 3-12 feet tall. Lower leaves are opposite and upper leaves are alternate, and the leaves are long-stalked and palmately divided into 3-7 toothed leaflets. Flowers are small and green."
Hemp (Cannabis sativa)	Distribution	"Hemp occurs in most areas of the United States, particularly where it was originally grown for its fiber. Habitats include borders of floodplain woodlands, borders of low-lying fields, weedy meadows along rivers, fence rows, and roadside ditches."
Hemp (Cannabis sativa)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poisoning commonly occurs when large quantities of the plant are ingested. All parts of the plant are poisonous, but the greatest toxicity is found in the flower stalks. Poisoning symptoms can also occur from inhalation of the plant."
Hemp (Cannabis sativa)	Control	"Mammalian herbivores avoid browsing hemp when other plants are available, so be sure that animals grazing in areas infested with hemp have plentiful options for food."
Hemp (Cannabis sativa)	Toxic Principle	"Resins, including Delta-9-THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) and cannabidiol."
Hemp (Cannabis sativa)	Clinical Signs	"Prolonged depression, vomiting, incoordination, sleepiness or excitation, hypersalivaton, dilated pupils, blurred vision, low blood pressure, low body temperature, seizure, coma, death (rare). Consumption of the plant may also affect the flavor and odor of the milk produced by the poisoned animal."
Hemp (Cannabis sativa)	Animals Affected	"Dogs, cats, horses"
Hemp (Cannabis sativa)	References Used	https://plants.ces.ncsu.edu/plants/all/cannabis-sativa/
Hemp (Cannabis sativa)	References Used	https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control/toxic-and-non-toxic-plants/indian-hemp-0
Hemp (Cannabis sativa)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
Horse Nettle or Bull Nettle (Solanum carolinense L.)	Description	"Horse Nettle grows to be about 1-2 feet tall, and has yellow spines on the stems and leaves. Both the leaves and flowers are simple, alternate, oblong, and irregularly lobed. The flowers are in clusters at the top of the plant, ranging from pale violet to white in color. The berries are about 1-1.5cm in diameter and are yellow when they're ripe. Flowers appear in June to August, are light purple to white, 3/4 to 1 inch across, and in short racemes near the top of the plant. Petals are united with 5 points at the margin. Fruits are globose, about 1/2 inch in diameter and yellow when mature. Yellow or brownish seeds are numerous, and irregularly circular, about 1/8 inch across. "
Horse Nettle or Bull Nettle (Solanum carolinense L.)	Distribution	"Horse Nettle is found throughout the Southern United States, as well as parts of the Midwest and Northeastern states. In particular, it is a perennial weed of disturbed soils and unused areas along roads and field edges, especially of the southern States. It is a common weed in all counties of Illinois."
Horse Nettle or Bull Nettle (Solanum carolinense L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poisoning occurs primarily when animals are confined in overgrazed fields or where nightshade is abundant. The hazard of poisoning varies depending on the plant species, maturity of plants, and other conditions. Generally, the leaves and green fruits are toxic. Ingestion of juice from wilted leaves may be especially toxic and sometimes deadly. Many cases of poisoning have been reported as a result of eating green berries. Green berries have produced severe intestinal, oral and esophageal lesions in sheep. Cattle reportedly seek out the berries of Solanum species and will eat the green plant, specially when other green forage is unavailable."
Horse Nettle or Bull Nettle (Solanum carolinense L.)	Control	"Animals should be kept away from fields with heavy infestation of nightshade. Plants should be mowed or pulled up while in flower, and burned. Remove green parts of potatoes before cooking, eat only ripe tubers."
Horse Nettle or Bull Nettle (Solanum carolinense L.)	Toxic Principle	"Tropane alkaloids, especially solanine, which has similar effects as atropine on the autonomic nervous system. Also directly irritating to the oral and gastric mucosa. Green plant and unripe fruits are the most toxic. Toxicity is reduced by drying."
Horse Nettle or Bull Nettle (Solanum carolinense L.)	Clinical Signs	"Nausea, vomiting, salivation, drowsiness, abdominal pain, diarrhea, weakness, respiratory depression; may be fatal."
Horse Nettle or Bull Nettle (Solanum carolinense L.)	Animals Affected	"Horse, cattle, goats, sheep, pigs, rabbits"
Horse Nettle or Bull Nettle (Solanum carolinense L.)	References Used	https://plants.ces.ncsu.edu/plants/all/solanum-carolinense/
Horsetails (Equisetum arvense L.)	Description	"Herbaceous, perennial, leafless plants with hollow stems that readily separate at the nodes. The leaves are reduced to papery scales with black tips that surround the stems at each node. The stems are cylindrical, ridged and rough to the touch owing to the high silicate content. There are two types of stem, fertile and infertile. Fertile stems are unbranched, and are tipped by a cone-like structure containing spores. Infertile stems have multiple whorled branches at the nodes. The plant reproduces from a deeply buried rhizome and from terminal spore bearing cones. (Colorado State University's Veterinary Teaching Hospital's Guide to Poisonous Plants)"
Horsetails (Equisetum arvense L.)	Distribution	"Horsetail is a weed that grows in sandy soils in fields, ditches along roads, and along the banks of rivers. There are six species growing in North America, and they tend to prefer cooler, moist growing conditions. "
Horsetails (Equisetum arvense L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	Plants are toxic at all stages and remain toxic when in hay. Young horses are most susceptible to Equisetum poisoning. Plant is rarely eaten except when dried in hay. Hays containing 20% horsetail or bracken fern will result in thiamin-deficiency symptoms in 2-5 weeks.
Horsetails (Equisetum arvense L.)	Control	Animals suspected of being poisoned by horsetail varieties should be taken off of hay or pasture containing the plant and fed a nutritious diet that includes cereal grains rich in thiamine. Treatment with a large dose of thiamine hydrochloride (3-5 mg per kg of body weight) intravenously followed by several days of thiamine intramuscularly (1-2 mg per kg of body weight) provides rapid recovery and restores thiamine levels to normal.
Horsetails (Equisetum arvense L.)	Toxic Principle	"Thiaminase is the suspected toxin. Also contains aconitic acid and polustrine, and silicates. All species of Equisetum should be considered potentially toxic to animals until proven otherwise. "
Horsetails (Equisetum arvense L.)	Clinical Signs	"Initial weight loss followed several weeks later by incoordination of the hind legs. Diarrhea may also occur before the onset of weight loss and incoordination. Affected animals become progressively weaker and eventually recumbent, and staggers and tremors may be seen. Serum pyruvate levels increase while thiamin levels are depleted. Once horses are down and cannot get up, they usually die within 1 to 2 weeks. Cattle poisoned with horsetail generally show weight loss, decreased milk production, diarrhea, and hyperexcitability."
Horsetails (Equisetum arvense L.)	Animals Affected	"Horses, cattle, sheep"
Horsetails (Equisetum arvense L.)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Other common names	Hyacinth blossoms
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Description	Hyacinth is one of all the early spring blooming flowers most favored by home gardeners. It is a bulbous herb
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Description	"Hyancinth Bulbsof the lily family with its origin in the Mediterranean region and cultivated in many color varieties. Green leaves, 7-8 per bulb, all arising from the ground level, are fleshy, glossy, narrow with smooth margins, 4-12 inches long and about 3/4 inches wide without marginal teeth. Flowers, borne in a dense raceme on a 6-8 inch long stem, are bell-shaped, and eventually open into 6 reflexed tepals. The flower is most well known for its fragrance. Fruits are globose and have 3 divisions. The bulb is 1-1/2 to 2 inches in diameter, light purple or cream colored, and covered with dry skin-like layers."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Distribution	Hyacinths are often potted and grown inside or grown outdoors in gardens.
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Conditions of Poisoning	"The poisonous principle is concentrated in the bulb. Ingesting only a small amount of the bulb may cause stomach upset. Keep the bulbs out of the reach of animals, particularly dogs, cattle, and pigs. Other plant parts are also poisonous, but are less concentrated than in the bulb."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Toxic Principle	Contains calcium oxalate raphides in what appears to be ejector cells (similar to Araceae plants) and alkaloids such as lycorine. Both bulbs and plants may be irritating to the skin and gastrointestinal tract.
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Clinical Signs	"Hyacinth poisoning is very rare. Clinical signs usually include digestive tract disorders such as colic, vomiting and diarrhea. Skin irritation from contact is possible, although usually minor. Allergic asthma and nasal irritation in susceptible individuals."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Animals Affected	"Dogs, cattle, pigs, cats, horses"
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	References Used	https://plants.ces.ncsu.edu/plants/all/hyacinthus-orientalis/
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Other common names	Hydrangea (Hydrangea spp.)
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Other common names	Pink Hydrangea blossom
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Description	"The cultivated species, Hydrangea macrophylla Ser. (= H. hortensis), is a deciduous shrub which can reach nearly 6 feet. The common cultivated species is grown widely in gardens and as potted plants. The flowers among the cultivated species include white, pink, mauve, bluish purple, to blue. The forms of the flower clusters and the leaves of the cultivated species are similar to those of the cold-hardy wild species (H. arborescens L.)."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Description	"Wild hydrangeas, H. quercifolia Bartr. and H. arborescens L., are shrubs which reach from 3.5 to 10 feet in height. The stems are light green when new, turning light brown and woody with time. Leaves are alternate, 4-10 inches in length, dark green above, lighter or pale green on the underside. The leaves of H. quercifolia Bartr. are deeply lobed, while those of the other species (H. arborescens L.) are broadly rounded with apex tapering to a point. Flowers appear in clusters or heads, mostly with 4 petals in white or cream color, blooming from June to July. The capsular fruit is less than 1/8 inch in length and has many small, thin brown seeds."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Distribution	"Though wild hydrangeas are sometimes grown as ornamental shrubs in gardens, H. arborescens L. is widely distributed in wooded areas, rarely in full sunlight, from New York to Georgia, west to Kansas and Oklahoma including the southern half of Illinois. H. quercifolia Bartr. is limited to the southeastern states and usually grows in considerable shade on river bluffs and steep banks of sinkholes."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Conditions of Poisoning	"Generally poisoning is rare and only occurs after eating large quantities of the plant, but a horse was seriously poisoned after eating a single potted hydrangea."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Toxic Principle	"May contain the cyanogenic glycoside hydrangin, but cyanide intoxication is rare and poisonings do not generally involve effects or clinical signs of typical cyanide."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Clinical Signs	"Affected animals may experience painful gastroenteritis, and diarrhea which may be bloody."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Animals Affected	"Dogs, cats, horses"
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Animals Affected	Jack-in-the-Pulpit (Arisaema spp.)
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Description	"Jack-in-the-pulpit is a stemless plant, 8 inches to 2 feet tall, that grows in the woods. It has one or two long-stalked, 3-parted leaves; and at the tip of its flowerstalk, which is not quite as long as the leaves, it has a peculiar flowering structure, tinted shades of green, greenish-white, and purple."
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Description	"The leaves and flower stalks rise from an underground, perennial corm, hard and turnip-shaped. The fruit is a mass of brilliant red or scarlet berries, each containing 1 to 5 seeds. Emerging Jack-in-the-Pulpit"
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Distribution	"Jack-in-the-pulpit is common to abundant throughout Illinois in open and dense, moist woods and may be seen also in woods clearings and occasionally in pastures and at the edges of pastures that were formerly woodland. Though commonly regarded as an early spring plant, it persists through the growing season and is conspicuous in late summer and fall by its dense clusters of red berries. "
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Conditions of Poisoning	"Animals, if grazed in wooded pastures in early spring when other forage is not available, may eat the root of this plant. Susceptible species are cattle, sheep, goats, and swine. Mature Fruit"
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Control	"Cattle should not be grazed in wooded pastures at any time when jack-in-the-pulpit is one of the few green plants available. Although there is no satisfactory way of eradicating it, its numbers will be considerably lessened if it is consistently dug when seen. "
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Toxic Principle	"The corms of the plant contain an unidentified volatile acrid principle, calcium oxalate crystals, and possibly an alkaloid. The corms are gathered, dried, and sold by drug collectors. "
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Clinical Signs	"Cattle, sheep, goats, and swine are susceptible to this poisoning, but they seldom eat enough of the plant to cause trouble. The corms would doubtless affect any animal that ate them. Eating the corms causes an intense burning and biting sensation in the mouth, throat, and stomach; large doses may cause inflammation of the stomach and intestine. Affected animals show evidence of colic, and they attempt to cool the mouth and throat with water. "
"Hyacinth (Hyacinth orientalis, Hyacinth blossoms)"	Animals Affected	"Cattle, sheep, goats, swine"
Japanense Yew (Taxus cuspidata Sieb. & Zucc.)	Description	"Japanese Yew is an evergreen shrub with dark green leaves. The leaves grow alternately, with stiff, flat and needle-like leaves. The leaves grow from 1/2 inch to 1 inch long. Japanese Yew's berries are bright red and egg-shaped. It is a very common oriental shrub across North America. The shrubs grow up to 20 feet tall."
Japanense Yew (Taxus cuspidata Sieb. & Zucc.)	Distribution	"Though Japanese Yew was originally imported to the United States, it is now found throughout the country because of it being cultivated in both landscape architecture and design. In particular, the plant is found in the Northwestern United States and is widespread across the East Coast and throughout the Midwest. "
Japanense Yew (Taxus cuspidata Sieb. & Zucc.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Consuming Yew introduces several toxins into the body. All parts of the plant are toxic. The plant is toxic year-round, with a higher level of toxicity occurring at the end of the year because there's been time for the toxin to build up in the plant. Both fresh and dried yew is toxic. "
Japanense Yew (Taxus cuspidata Sieb. & Zucc.)	Control	Animals should not be allowed to graze near where Japanese Yew is growing. 
Japanense Yew (Taxus cuspidata Sieb. & Zucc.)	Toxic Principle	"Japanese Yew has a wide variety of toxins, including Taxine A and Taxine B, and Oil of Yew. Both Taxins are found in all parts of the plant except the fruit. Oil of Yew is found in the Yew's sap, and is an intestinal irritant that is the cause of colic and diarrhea symptoms of yew poisoning."
Japanense Yew (Taxus cuspidata Sieb. & Zucc.)	Clinical Signs	"There are two syndromes of Japanese Yew poisoning an animal can exhibit--Acute and Subacute. The primary symptom of Acute Syndrome is death, which usually occurs 1-3 hours after consuming the Yew. The symptoms of Subacute Syndrome include Ataxia, diarrhea, hypotension, colic, hypothermia, coma, seizures, weakness, respiratory failure, bradycardia and sudden death. Most animals usually die within 24-48 hours of consuming the yew. "
Japanense Yew (Taxus cuspidata Sieb. & Zucc.)	Animals Affected	All animals
Japanense Yew (Taxus cuspidata Sieb. & Zucc.)	References Used	http://poisonousplants.ansci.cornell.edu/yew.html
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Other common names	"Jamestown Weed, Thorn Apple, Devil's Trumpet, Mad Apple, Stink Weed"
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Description	"Jimsonweed is a stout, coarse annual herb 2 to 5 feet tall, with spreading branches. It has a pale-green stem and large, ovate, green or purplish, strong-scented leaves, coarsely toothed on their margins. Its flowers are large, white, and tubular, 2 to 4 inches long, and set on short stalks in the axils of branches. Its circular seeds, about 1/8 inch across, are contained in a hard, prickly capsule which, when ripe, splits lengthwise into four parts."
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Distribution	"Jimsonweed is sometimes grows in cultivated fields, overgrazed pastures, and waste lots. It prefers rich soil and may be found throughout Illinois as well as other states from New England to Texas and Florida."
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"All parts of the Jimsonweed are poisonous, but because of its strong odor and unpleasant taste, animals rarely eat enough of the green plant to be poisoned. Poisoning in animals occurs primarily when hungry animals are turned into a Jimsonweed-infested area where better forage is absent. Most cases of animal poisoning result from a quantity of the dried plant being fed in hay, while poisoning in chickens is due to eating of the seeds. Occasionally Jimsonweeds are accidentally included when the silo is filled. When the silage is fed to the animals poisoning occurs."
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Jimsonweed is also known as Jamestown weed because of the mass poisoning of soldiers in Jamestown, Virginia in 1676. Jimsonweed poisoning is more common among humans than in animals."
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Control	"Hungry animals should never be allowed to graze where there is Jimsonweed. In meadows where the plant grows, hay should not be made until after all Jimsonweeds have been removed. The custom of destroying this plant should be practiced on all farms. "
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Toxic Principle	Tropane alkaloids:
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Toxic Principle	Hyoscyamine = an isomer of atropine.
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Toxic Principle	Scopalamine = L-hyoscine = epoxidized hyoscyamine. 
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Clinical Signs	"Early signs of poisoning include: rapid pulse, rapid breathing, dilated pupils, restlessness, nervousness, muscular twitching, polydipsia, frequent urination, diarrhea, depression, anorexia, and weight loss. In fatal cases the pulse remains rapid but weak, breathing becomes slow and irregular, body temperature becomes subnormal, urine may be retained, and convulsions or coma precede death."
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Clinical Signs	"In cattle: excitability, tremors, rumen atony, nervousness, bloat, tenesmus, and anorexia. Death occasionally reported."
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Clinical Signs	"In goats: Datura stramonium ingestion was accompanied by tachypnea, tremors, drowsiness, recumbency, and altered locomotion."
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Clinical Signs	"In sheep: Datura stramonium ingestion was associated with ataxia, inability to stand, tachypnea, reduced drinking and mild tremors."
Jimsonweed (Datura stramonium L.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, goats, sheep"
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Gymnocladus dioica (L.) Koch)	Description	"Kentucky coffee tree is a large round-barked tree belonging to the legume family and reaches heights of 60 to 100 feet. Its short trunk, 1 to 2 feet in diameter, divides into several large branches that end in contorted, stout twigs. Twice-compound leaves are arranged feather-fashion in 3-7 pairs of leaflets which are more or less ovalish without marginal teeth and 2-4 inches long. The tree is most easily identified in fall and winter for its large depressed leaf scars. The leaf which emerges late in spring is made up of a hundred or more separate oval leaflets arranged on the branches of the rib."
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Gymnocladus dioica (L.) Koch)	Description	"The flower, which blooms in May, is inconspicuous, greenish-white in terminal racemes, and has a tubular base about 1/2 inch long. Male and female flowers are found on the same tree. The fruit is a thick, flat pod, containing 4-7 flat broad seeds with a sticky pulp between them. The pulp dries at maturity and the seeds become olive-brown, 1/2 - 3/4 inches in diameter. "
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Gymnocladus dioica (L.) Koch)	Distribution	"The Kentucky coffee tree grows in moist woods, creek banks, and flood plains. It is mainly found in the Midwest from western Ohio to eastern Kansas and Oklahoma, southern Michigan to northern Alabama and Tennessee. The tree was much planted around farm houses and may now be maintained as ornamentals around newer buildings."
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Gymnocladus dioica (L.) Koch)	Conditions of Poisoning	"The leaves, seeds and pulp are poisonous and have affected sheep, cattle, horses, and humans. Sprouts eaten in the spring have produced toxicosis. Pods and seeds on the ground eaten in the fall or winter have produced poisoning. Leaves, young sprouts and seeds with the gelatinous material around them contain the toxin. "
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Gymnocladus dioica (L.) Koch)	Control	"Until spring grasses and herbage are abundant, animals should not be grazed in woods where the Kentucky coffee tree grows or where it has been cut and allowed to sprout. Since there are never more than a few of these trees in any woodland, sprouts can be grubbed out periodically, and thus poisoning from them can be prevented."
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Gymnocladus dioica (L.) Koch)	Control	"The pods cling to the tree through the winter and are shed in the spring. To prevent animals from eating the fallen pods, large fruiting trees can be fenced in. Although the tree has little commercial value, it is so rare that unnecessary cutting of it is not recommended."
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Gymnocladus dioica (L.) Koch)	Toxic Principle	"The toxic principle of this plant is uncertain. It is possibly the quinolizidine alkaloid, cytisine, which acts like nicotine."
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Gymnocladus dioica (L.) Koch)	Clinical Signs	"Clinical signs include rapid onset (within 1 hour) of intense gastrointestinal irritation, profuse diarrhea and straining, vomiting, hypertension, bradycardia, respiratory depression, muscle paralysis, and convulsions. Animals often display depression. Death usually occurs within a day after clinical signs appear."
Kentucky Coffee Tree (Gymnocladus dioica (L.) Koch)	Animals Affected	"Sheep, horses, cattle"
Lamb's Quarters (or Lambsquarters) (Chenopodium album L.)	Description	Lamb's Quarters is an annual weed with branched stems. The stems have purple or red stripes or marks. The leaves alternate and are green with a grey underside. The leaves growing at the base of the stem have more of a serrated edge than the leaves towards the top of the plant do. The leaves at the top of the plant are smaller. Flowers grow at the end of the stems and are grey-green. 
Lamb's Quarters (or Lambsquarters) (Chenopodium album L.)	Distribution	Lamb's Quarters is found throughout North America.
Lamb's Quarters (or Lambsquarters) (Chenopodium album L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Animals are poisoned when they consume large quantities of Lamb's Quarters. The leaves and grains of the plant used as a food source in some areas, and can be safely consumed in limited doses."
Lamb's Quarters (or Lambsquarters) (Chenopodium album L.)	Toxic Principle	Lamb's Quarters is a Nitrate Accumulator. It can acquire toxic levels of nitrates if grown in rich soil or if it's fertilized like it would be if grown in cropland. It can also accumulate toxic levels of Oxalates and Sulfates. All parts of the plant are toxic. 
Lamb's Quarters (or Lambsquarters) (Chenopodium album L.)	Clinical Signs	"Signs of nitrate poisoning include difficulty breathing and the mucous membranes of the mouth and vulva turning brown due to methemoglobin in the blood. Other symptoms are depression, weakness, tremors, weak pulse, and coma. Sudden death can occur due to respiratory failure because of methemoglobin forming. "
Lamb's Quarters (or Lambsquarters) (Chenopodium album L.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, sheep, goats"
Lamb's Quarters (or Lambsquarters) (Chenopodium album L.)	References Used	"Burrows, George E., & Tyrl, Ronald J. (2013). Toxic plants of North America. Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell."
Lantana (Lantana camara L.)	Description	"Lantana (yellow sage) is a native of tropical Americas and West Africa. In the northern states including Illinois, it is grown as a garden annual reaching 12-18 inches tall. In the south, from Florida to California, it grows as a perennial shrub of 3-6 feet tall. In the tropics, it may grow even taller. Leaves are opposite, ovate, 1-5 inches long and 1-2 inches wide, with very small rounded teeth, somewhat rough and hairy. Leaves are aromatic when crushed. Flowers are borne in dense clusters 1-2 inches across on the axils near the top of the stem. Each flower is tubular with 4 lobes flaring to about 1/4 inch, initially yellow or pink gradually changing to orange and deep red. Often, the different colored flowers are present on the same cluster. Fruit is fleshy, greenish-blue to black, and berry-like with each containing one seed."
Lantana (Lantana camara L.)	Distribution	"Lantana is commonly found along roadsides, fence rows, and in fields in Florida and southern California where it escaped cultivation. In the northern U.S., it is strictly a garden and greenhouse annual. "
Lantana (Lantana camara L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Animals in pastures with sufficient forage will often avoid Lantana, perhaps because of its pungent aroma and taste, but animals unfamiliar to the plant may ingest enough to affect them. Fifty to ninety percent of animals newly exposed may be affected. Foliage and ripe berries contain the toxic substances with the toxins being in higher concentrations in the green berries."
Lantana (Lantana camara L.)	Toxic Principle	"Lantana contains lantadene A and B (the major toxins involved in poisoning) as well as other structurally and toxicologically related pentacyclic triterpene acids, including reduced lantadene A, dihydrolantadene A, and icterogenin."
Lantana (Lantana camara L.)	Clinical Signs	"The major clinical effect of Lantana toxicosis is photosensitization, the onset of which often takes place in 1 to 2 days after consumption of a toxic dose (1% or more of animal's body weight). Jaundice is usually prominent, animals usually become inappetent, and they often exhibit decreased digestive tract motility and constipation. Other signs may include: sluggishness, weakness, and transient, sometimes bloody diarrhea. In acute cases, death occurs in 2 to 4 days. Subacute poisoning is more common and may result in death after 1 to 3 weeks of illness and weight loss. Raw photosensitized surface areas are susceptible to invasions by blowfly maggots and bacteria. In severely affected cattle, lesions may appear at the muzzle, mouth, and nostrils. Ulceration may be present in the cheeks, tongue, and gums, while swelling, hardening, peeling of mucous membranes, and deeper tissues occur in the nostrils."
Lantana (Lantana camara L.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, sheep, horses, dogs, cats, guinea pigs, and rabbits"
Lantana (Lantana camara L.)	References Used	"Ross, I. A. (1999). Medicinal plants of the world: Chemical constituents, traditional, and modern medicinal uses. Totowa, N.J.: Humana Press."
Lantana (Lantana camara L.)	References Used	https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control/toxic-and-non-toxic-plants/lantana
"Larkspur, Dwarf and Other Larkspurs (Delphinium tricorne Michx. and other species)"	Description	"Dwarf larkspur is an erect, little-branched herb 1 to 3 feet tall. Its leaves, alternately placed and slender-stalked, are deeply divided into 5 to 7 nearly separate lobes, each lobe itself again rather deeply lobed or toothed. Its stout stem ends in a flower-bearing part that carries several blue or white, spurred blossoms 1 to 1 1/2 inches long. Three short-pointed rather fragile, widely spreading pods about 1/2 inch long develop from each blossom. These pods contain numerous small, dark seeds."
"Larkspur, Dwarf and Other Larkspurs (Delphinium tricorne Michx. and other species)"	Description	"The rocket larkspur (Delphinium ajacis L.), which is cultivated and sometimes escapes, may be recognized from the above general description. It is supposed, in common with all other larkspurs, to be poisonous."
"Larkspur, Dwarf and Other Larkspurs (Delphinium tricorne Michx. and other species)"	Distribution	"The dwarf larkspur occurs principally in the southern third of Illinois, where it is most often found in ravines and along streams in wooded sections. Northward it becomes less frequent and probably does not grow in the northernmost two or three tiers of counties."
"Larkspur, Dwarf and Other Larkspurs (Delphinium tricorne Michx. and other species)"	Distribution	"The rocket larkspur, also, is most abundant in southern counties, where it is most often found in open woods and fallow fields."
"Larkspur, Dwarf and Other Larkspurs (Delphinium tricorne Michx. and other species)"	Conditions of Poisoning	"Larkspurs are among the early spring plants, blossoming in late April and May. Animals turned out to graze in woods in the spring may eat the plant, especially if other herbage is scant. Cattle are the animals most often poisoned. Horses are susceptible to the poisoning but generally avoid larkspurs. Sheep, although seemingly resistant, can be poisoned by large amounts. Fatal poisoning of an animal may result from a single day's consumption of 1 percent or less of the animal's body weight of larkspur plants."
"Larkspur, Dwarf and Other Larkspurs (Delphinium tricorne Michx. and other species)"	Control	"Animals, especially cattle, should not be grazed in woodland pastures infested with larkspurs until there is an abundance of other herbage for them to browse. Heavily infested pastures probably should not be used until the larkspurs have been destroyed. In woods, where it is hard to use chemical weed-killers, the only way to eliminate the plant is to dig it out by the roots. "
"Larkspur, Dwarf and Other Larkspurs (Delphinium tricorne Michx. and other species)"	Toxic Principle	"Although larkspurs contain several other alkaloids, the main poison is the glucoside delphinin. "
"Larkspur, Dwarf and Other Larkspurs (Delphinium tricorne Michx. and other species)"	Clinical Signs	"Symptoms of larkspur poisoning vary according to the amount eaten and the animal's tolerance of the poison. Small amounts may cause loss of appetite, excitability, staggering, or muscular incoordination, and constipation. Severe symptoms include slobbering, nausea, vomiting, colic, bloating, and convulsive movements. Fatal poisoning brings convulsions and paralysis of the respiratory system. Autopsies reveal inflammation, or at least congestion of the windpipe, stomach and small intestine, congestion of the superficial blood vessels, and dark, extremely congested kidneys."
"Larkspur, Dwarf and Other Larkspurs (Delphinium tricorne Michx. and other species)"	Animals Affected	"Cattle, horses, sheep, dogs, cats"
"Larkspur, Dwarf and Other Larkspurs (Delphinium tricorne Michx. and other species)"	References Used	https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control/toxic-and-non-toxic-plants/larkspur
Lily of the Valley (Convallaria majalis)	Description	"Lily of the Valley is perennial that originally grew in Europe. The leaves are oval or oblong shaped and dull green in color. The plant has an arched stem with typically 5-18 white, bell-shaped flowers growing on it. Lily of the Valley does occasionally grow small, red berries. It is a popular potted house plant."
Lily of the Valley (Convallaria majalis)	Distribution	"While it is native to Europe, Lily of the Valley has been introduced in North America and has now become naturalized in some parts."
Lily of the Valley (Convallaria majalis)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Lily of the Valley is poisonous when eaten, though it's more common for children to get poisoned than for animals. There have been few reports of animals getting poisoned from consuming Lily of the Valley. "
Lily of the Valley (Convallaria majalis)	Toxic Principle	"There are 38 different cardenolides which have been identified in Lily of the Valley, with a large concentration of them found in the plant's roots. All parts of the plant, including the bulb and roots, are toxic. "
Lily of the Valley (Convallaria majalis)	Clinical Signs	"Vomiting, salivation, limited diarrhea, irregular pulse or decreased heart rate, seizures."
Lily of the Valley (Convallaria majalis)	Animals Affected	"All animals, people"
Lily of the Valley (Convallaria majalis)	References Used	"Burrows, George E., & Tyrl, Ronald J. (2013). Toxic plants of North America. Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell."
Lupine (Lupinus)	Description	"Lupine is a herbaceous perennial, 12-26 inches tall. Leaves are alternate, palmately divided into 10-15 narrowly oblong leaflets. The leaflets are smooth or hairy above, and very hairy beneath. Bonnet-shaped flowers are born in racemes on a single center stalk 4-10 inches long. The flowers bloom in early to mid summer displaying their wide range of colors from deep blue, purple, light blue, lavender, rose, pink, yellow, and white. The fruit is a pod about one inch long containing several somewhat flattened seeds. The seeds are cream-colored and irregularly circular, and no more than 1/4 inch in diameter. "
Lupine (Lupinus)	Distribution	"Lupines thrive in dry open fields and prairie/wooded areas. The horticultural variety of lupine has been a favorite of many gardeners for ages. Though Lupine in Illinois is most frequently seen in flower gardens, most of the approximately 100 native species are found throughout the U.S. and Canada, mainly in states west of the Rockies. A blue wild variety of lupine covers Texas open ranges in early summer, earning the rank of the State Flower. A different wild variety is also widely encountered in early summer by the visitors of the Olympic National Park in the State of Washington. "
Lupine (Lupinus)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poisoning varies depending on the lupine species and varieties, and it is difficult to pin point to specific plant or animal since different animals become susceptible in different ways under varying range conditions."
Lupine (Lupinus)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Species and taxonomic differentiation between species are insufficiently characterized. Different lupines produce varying syndromes in a a given species of livestock. Seasonal variation in toxicity in a given species of lupine exist and many species are acceptable forage under range conditions. Plants which are in the preflowering stage of maturity are unlikely to be hazardous, under normal range circumstances, except in the case of L. leucophyllus which may cause toxicosis as a result of consumption of young plants. Alkaloids are not lost upon drying. Range hay may be highly toxic if the seeds are retained, and this occurs when the majority of the pods are immature; mature pods open when drying and the seeds are dropped as the hay is bundled. For many lupines, the time and degree of seeding varies year to year."
Lupine (Lupinus)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Most losses occur under conditions in which animals consume large amounts of pods in a brief period, such as trailing animals through an area where the grass is covered by snow but the lupine is not or when feeding podded lupine hay, which is apparently palatable. Most cases of serious poisoning therefore occur in the fall because lupine remains green after other forage has dried."
Lupine (Lupinus)	Toxic Principle	"More than a dozen quinolizidine alkaloids, but some piperidine alkaloids and other types of alkaloids have also been isolated from species of Lupinus. These alkaloids are largely nicotinic in effect. The nitrogen oxides of some of these bases have also been detected in some lupines. The alkaloids are present in the foliage but the greatest concentration is in the seeds."
Lupine (Lupinus)	Clinical Signs	"Signs include characteristic labored breathing (snores) in sheep, with depression, salivation, ataxa, clonic spasms, head pressing tremors, seizures and coma, and frequently death. Death may be preceded only by coma and no other signs or alternatively, preceded by violent attacks on other animals or objects. Signs may appear as early as one hour after ingestion or as late as 24 hours after consumption. Death may occur within one day or occur several days later and is a result of respiratory paralysis. Cattle under range conditions rarely display clinical signs. Consumption of the plant may also affect the flavor and odor of the milk produced by the poisoned animal."
Lupine (Lupinus)	Animals Affected	"Sheep, cattle, horses"
Lupine (Lupinus)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	Description	"Trees are large and can reach heights of approximately 100 feet when mature. Leaves have three to five lobes and are simple and opposite with red petiole, shiny green topside and white/gray underside. Leaves turn red during the fall. "
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	Distribution	Red maple trees are common throughout most of eastern North America and south to Florida and Texas. They adapt to moist or dry areas and are often planted as ornamental trees.
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	Conditions of Poisoning	Poisoning usually occurs when horses consume wilted or dried leaves of the red maple. Most poisonings occur in the fall when the bulk of the leaves drop. 
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	Control	Maintain a good feeding program for horses and remove red maple leaves and fallen branches from horse enclosures. Do not plant red maple trees in or near horse enclosures.
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	Toxic Principle	Pyrogallol.
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	Clinical Signs	"Consumption of the wilted leaves is known to cause oxidative damage to equine erythrocytes that may result in intravascular or extravascular hemolysis, Heinz body formation, and/or methemoglobinemia. After consumption, horses exhibit clinical signs within 1 to 2 days. Symptoms include destruction of red blood cells (anemia), weakness, dark urine, difficulty breathing, abortion, and death. The fatality rate after consumption has been reported to be between 50-65%."
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	Animals Affected	"Horses, alpacas, zebras"
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	References Used	"Wilson, D. A., DVM. (2012). Clinical veterinary advisor: The horse. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders."
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	References Used	"Burrows, George E., & Tyrl, Ronald J. (2013). Toxic plants of North America. Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell."
"Maple, Red (Acer rubrum)"	References Used	https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control/toxic-and-non-toxic-plants/red-maple
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum L.)	Description	"Mayapple is a perennial herb of the Barberry family. Leaves are umbrella-shaped and are about 8 inches wide with 5-9 lobes. Plants that have a single leaf do not flower, while those with two leaves develop a single flower in the axil of the leaf stalks. The flower appears at the end of the downward-curved flower stalk about 1 inch long. The flower, with 6 or more white petals and about 1.5-2 inches across, blooms in April to May, and is eventually replaced by a green ovoid fruit. The plant withers away by mid-summer."
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum L.)	Description	"Although the creeping, fleshy rhizome has been used to prepare medicine commercially, it is poisonous by contact. The green leaves and unripened fruit are poisonous but the fruit becomes edible as it ripens and turns greenish-yellow in color. "
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum L.)	Distribution	"Mayapple is found throughout the eastern and midwestern states of the U.S., from New York to Georgia and as far west as eastern Kansas and northeastern Oklahoma. Mayapple grows in colonies in damp meadows, woodlands, pastures, and along roadsides, and is a familiar spring woodland plant in all counties of Illinois. "
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poisoning of livestock occurs primarily in the spring, but the plant is usually avoided and seldom eaten in harmful amounts by livestock. The root is the most toxic part and handling of it may cause dermatitis or other skin problems in humans. "
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum L.)	Toxic Principle	"The toxic principles include the bitter resinous substance podophyllin, which is extractable with alcohol and precipitated in water. Podophyllin is actually a mixture of at least 16 physiologically active compounds, which are divisible into two groups, the lignans and flavonols. One of the active lignans is podophyllotoxin."
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum L.)	Clinical Signs	"General signs include purgation, catharsis, and other signs referable to gastroenteritis."
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum L.)	Clinical Signs	"Affected cattle may show the following signs: hypersalivation, anorexia, lacrimation, diarrhea, and excitation which lasts about 1 day. The muzzle and intermandibular area as well as the eyelids may become swollen."
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum L.)	Clinical Signs	"When swine consume mayapple shoots or leaves, death may occur after few signs."
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum L.)	Clinical Signs	"Experimental studies with a podophyllotoxin from a plant in the same family, also termed mayapple, show evidence of degenerative changes in the liver, intestine, testis and pancreas in orally exposed animals. "
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum L.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, swine, dogs, cats"
"Milkweed, Common (Asclepias syriaca L.)"	Description	"Common milkweed is an herbaceous perennial that can grow from 2 to 6 feet tall, though typically only grows to 3-4 feet. The stems of the plant are stout and leaves are light green, simple, and oblong, and are alternate and opposite. Stems and leaves produce a milky juice when injured. Flowers are dusty pink or lavender and fragrant, and grow in domed, drooping umbels in the leaf axis. Seed pods are 2 to 4 inches long and have a warty appearance, and split open when ripe to release numerous silky-tailed seeds which are dispersed by the wind."
"Milkweed, Common (Asclepias syriaca L.)"	Distribution	"Common milkweed can be found in all parts of the central to eastern United States. The plant can be found in fields, open woods, and by roadsides and railroad tracks."
"Milkweed, Common (Asclepias syriaca L.)"	Conditions of Poisoning	All parts of the plant are poisonous when eaten and toxicity is retained when dried.
"Milkweed, Common (Asclepias syriaca L.)"	Control	"Milkweeds tend to grow singly or in small groups and can be controlled by digging out individual plants or selectively spraying an herbicide such as 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D). Care should be taken not to include milkweed when making hay, as toxicity is not reduced by drying."
"Milkweed, Common (Asclepias syriaca L.)"	Toxic Principle	Cardiac glycosides and resinoids. The cardiac glycosides affect myocardial conduction and contractility in the poisoned animal.
"Milkweed, Common (Asclepias syriaca L.)"	Clinical Signs	"Signs of poisoning usually begin within 8-10 hours after ingestion and severity is influenced by how much of the plant was consumed. Symptoms include vomiting, stupor, weakness, spasms, and rapid and/or weak pulse."
"Milkweed, Common (Asclepias syriaca L.)"	Animals Affected	"Milkweed species are known to affect sheep, goats, cattle, horses, domestic fowl, cats, and dogs"
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Description	"About 1,500 Solanum species exist in the world, and they include some of the most common garden plants such as potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) and eggplant (Solanum melongena L.). One of the species, Jerusalem cherry (Solanum pseudocapcicum L.) is grown as a house plant for its compact form and small round berries which turn bright red at maturity. The tomato (Lycopercison esculentum Mill.) is also a related plant. Included in this entry are descriptions of Black Nightshade, Bittersweet Nightshade, Silverleaf Nightshade, and Horse Nettle. Horse Nettle also has its own expanded entry, and other related species may be found under their own names."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Description	Bittersweet Nightshade (S. dulcamara)
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Description	"Bittersweet nightshade is also known as European bittersweet or climbing nightshade. This plant grows from rhizomes and is a slender climbing or trailing perennial reaching 6 feet in length. Leaves are alternate, ovate, simple or deeply lobed, 1-1/2 to 4 inches long, and pointed at the tip. Flowers are deep purple or bluish purple with flower stalk arising between the leaf nodes or opposite the leaves. Nearly round fruits turn red when mature and stay on the vines through mid winter."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Description	Black Nightshade (S. nigrum)
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Description	"Black nightshade is an annual herb with a tap root. Stems are erect and much branched reaching 3 feet tall. Leaves alternate, ovate or lanceolate, and long-stalked. The flower has 5 white petals, sometimes with a yellow inner star, and ranges from 1/4 inch to 3/8 inch across. Berries are round and about 1/4 or so inches across, green, and turn purplish to black when ripe. Immature berries and foliage are toxic, but ripe fruits are reportedly edible."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Description	"Plants commonly known as black nightshade may include two native species, American Black Nightshade (S. americanum P. Mill.) and Eastern Black Nightshade (S. ptycanthum Dun.), as well as S. nigrum which was introduced from Europe and is widely naturalized. Solanum ptycanthum may be more commonly found in the midwest since S. americanum appears to be more concentrated in the southern states."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Description	"Horse Nettle, Bull Nettle (S. carolinense) ?"
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Description	"A perennial with a deep taproot and rhizome below ground. Its stem and leaves have yellowish spines and sometimes are hairy. Leaves are alternate and ovate with irregularly wavy or lobed margins. Flowers appear in June to August, are light purple to white, 3/4 to 1 inch across, and in short racemes near the top of the plant. Petals are united with 5 points at the margin. Fruits are globose, about 1/2 inch in diameter and yellow when mature. Yellow or brownish seeds are numerous, and irregularly circular, about 1/8 inch across. "
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Description	Silverleaf Nightshade or White Horse-Nettle (S. elaeagnifolium)
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Description	"This perennial herb gets its common name because of its silvery appearance caused by the numerous fine hairs. Its thick, lanceolate leaves are wavy and roughly indented (sinuate). The stems and parts of the leaves have short stiff spines. The flowers appear at the end of branches and have petals which are pale to deep blue or lavender in color."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Distribution	Bittersweet Nightshade (S. dulcamara)
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Distribution	"An introduced species from Eurasia, this plant is found in moist ground of low woods, roadsides, fence rows and thickets. It ranges from Nova Scotia to Minnesota through much of the Midwestern states and south to Florida and Texas. In Illinois, this plant is commonly found in the north-eastern counties including Champaign."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Distribution	Black Nightshade (S. nigrum)
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Distribution	"The native species, S. americanum, is usually found in undisturbed habitats or moist open woodlands, stream banks, valleys, fields, roadsides and waste places throughout the east central United States from Maine to Florida and west to Minnesota, Nebraska and Oklahoma. It is found in almost all counties of Illinois. The introduced species, S. nigrum, is rare in Illinois but abundant in some places from Minnesota and the Dakotas to Oklahoma."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Distribution	"Horse Nettle, Bull Nettle (Solanum carolinense L.)"
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Distribution	"This plant is found in waste spaces or neglected fields, gardens, and roadsides from the Atlantic coast to Texas, north to South Dakota and as far south as Florida. It is a common weed in all counties of Illinois."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Distribution	Silverleaf Nightshade or White Horse-Nettle (S. eleagnifolium)
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Distribution	"Silverleaf Nightshade is found in large colonies in open woodlands, pastures, stream valleys, roadsides and disturbed or waste grounds in the Southwest from Missouri to Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, Arizona, New Mexico and southwestern Colorado. This plant is found in a a few counties of Illinois, but a similar species (S. carolinense) is easily mistaken for this plant. "
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poisoning by these Solanum species occurs primarily when animals are confined in overgrazed fields or where nightshade is abundant. The hazard of poisoning varies depending on the plant species, maturity of plants, and other conditions."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Generally, the leaves and green fruits are toxic. Ingestion of juice from wilted leaves may be especially toxic and sometimes deadly. Many cases of poisoning have been reported as a result of eating green berries. Green berries have produced severe intestinal, oral and esophageal lesions in sheep. Cattle reportedly seek out the berries of Solanum species and will eat the green plant, specially when other green forage is unavailable. Silverleaf nightshade (S. eleagnifolium) is exceptional in that the ripe fruit is more toxic than the green. S. eleagnifolium is toxic at only 0.1% of the body weight. Toxicity is not lost upon drying. Solanine content increases up to maturity. Solanine, except in potatoes, is reportedly destroyed by cooking. Potato (S. tuberosum) peelings contain the major portion of the toxic principle in the tuber, and leaves, sprouts and vines. Sun-greened potatoes are especially toxic. Spoiled potatoes and peelings also have caused severe poisoning. Cooking does not appear to destroy all the alkaloids in greened potatoes. Toxicity may vary with the soil, climate and other variables. Animals may browse potato plants or eat sprouted potatoes, leading to problems. "
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Control	"Animals should be kept away from fields with heavy infestation of nightshade. Plants should be mowed or pulled up while in flower, and burned. Remove green parts of potatoes before cooking, eat only ripe tubers."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Toxic Principle	"Many contain the steroidal glycoalkaloid solanine. Upon hydrolysis, a sugar and the alkaloid solanidine are recovered. The free (unconjugated) steroidal alkaloid (the aglycone) is the primary form acting on the nervous system."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Toxic Principle	"Other aglycones present may include dihydrosolanidine, tomatidine and strophanthidin. Toxic properties of these compounds are characteristic of saponins."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Toxic Principle	"Some of these plants also have cardiac effects, e.g., Jerusalem cherry (S. pseudocapsicum) contains an additional alkaloid, solanocapsine, which produces bradycardia."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Toxic Principle	"In some plants, atropine-like constituents predominate, e.g., potato (S. tuberosum), and some strains and stages of black nightshade (S. nigrum)."
Nightshade (Solanum spp.)	Clinical Signs	"Clinical signs vary with irritant effect caused by the intact glycoalkaloid or saponin, and the nervous effects of the alkaloid. Irritant effects include hypersalivation, anorexia, severe gastrointestinal disturbances, with diarrhea that is often early and hemorrhagic. The nervous effects include apathy, drowsiness, depression, confusion, progressive muscular weakness, numbness, dilated pupils, trembling, labored breathing, nasal discharge, rapid heartbeat, weak pulse, bradycardia, central nervous system depression, and incoordination, often accompanied by paralysis of the rear legs. Coma may occur without other nervous signs. High doses may cause intestinal stasis and constipation. Hemolysis and anemia, possibly a result of saponins, have been reported, with renal failure in severe cases. Terminal signs include unconsciousness, shock, paralysis, coma, circulatory and respiratory depression, and death. The course varies from sudden death to 3-4 days of illness which may terminate in death or recovery. In less acutely poisoned animals, there may be yellow discoloration of the skin in unpigmented areas, weakness, incoordination, tremors of the rear legs, anemia, rapid heart rate and bloat."
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	Description	"Oleander is an ornamental evergreen shrub that can grow to approximately 20 feet tall. Its leaves are simple and narrowly lanceoleate, and 3-10 inches long. Its flowers are tubular with five or more petals and are commonly pink, red, purple, or white. The fruit pods contain many seeds, each with a tuft of hair to aid in dispersal."
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	Distribution	"Oleander grows commonly in the wild in the southern portion of the United States from California to Florida, and is also often grown as a cultivated plant in northern climates. It is extensively used in landscaping due to its resistance to drought, heat, wind poor soil conditions, and grazing."
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"All parts of the plant are highly toxic when ingested, and drying does not decrease toxicity. Sap from the plant can cause skin reactions in allergic individuals, and the smoke produced by burning the plant is also toxic. Ingestion is the most common cause of poisoning, and poisoning generally occurs when animals are allowed to graze where oleander is abundantly present. The lethal dose of green oleander leaves for horses and cattle is 0.005% of the total body weight, and the minimum lethal dose for cattle is 50 mg/kg of body weight. Horses that were given 40mg/kg of body weight consistently developed severe gastrointestinal and cardiac signs of poisoning."
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	Control	"Oleander plants can be removed by cutting the branches back and digging out the roots, but full removal may take time as any missed roots will continue to send up new shoots. Oleander is fast growing and tenacious, so any areas where a plant has been removed should be closely monitored for new growth and shoots should be cut back quickly. Caution should be used when pruning or removing oleander plants due to the toxic nature of the sap. Skin should be covered completely while working with the plant, a dust mask is recommended, and cuttings should not be burned."
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	Toxic Principle	"Cardiac glycosides, specifically oleandrin, oleandroside, nerioside, and neriine."
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	Clinical Signs	"Nausea, vomiting, drooling, abdominal pain, diarrhea (possibly bloody), dizziness, slowed or irregular heartbeat, dilation of pupils, drowsiness, death."
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	Animals Affected	"Humans, cattle, horses, dogs, cats, birds"
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	References Used	http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/PlantFinder/PlantFinderDetails.aspx?kempercode=a532
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	References Used	https://plants.ces.ncsu.edu/plants/all/nerium-oleander/
Oleander (Nerium oleander L.)	References Used	https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control/toxic-and-non-toxic-plants/oleander
Philodendron (Philodendron spp.)	Description	"Philodendron plants come in a variety of shapes and sizes depending on the species. Philodendrons commonly have shiny, dark green, deeply lobed leaves that can be several feet long, but that is not true for all species. The popularly cultivated heart leaf philodendron (Philodendron hederaceum) grows as a vine with heart-shaped leaves that are 4-12 inches long depending on the age of the plant and have no lobes."
Philodendron (Philodendron spp.)	Distribution	"Philodendron plants are natively tropical but are popular indoor plants due to their impressive foliage and low maintenance requirements. Some philodendron species may be seen in the in the wild in the southern United States, but it is more commonly encountered as a cultivated plant."
Philodendron (Philodendron spp.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poisoning occurs after ingestion. All parts of the plant are poisonous, but the leaves have the greatest concentration of the toxin. Skin irritation can also occur after contact with the sap, but is generally minor."
Philodendron (Philodendron spp.)	Toxic Principle	Calcium oxalates.
Philodendron (Philodendron spp.)	Clinical Signs	"Painful burning sensation accompanied by swelling of the lips, tongue, and throat when ingested. Drooling, vomiting (not in horses), difficulty swallowing or speaking, and diarrhea are also possible symptoms. Death can potentially occur from swelling of the windpipe, but is not commonly seen. Skin irritation can occur from contact with the sap."
Philodendron (Philodendron spp.)	Animals Affected	"Humans, dogs, cats, horses"
Philodendron (Philodendron spp.)	References Used	https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control/toxic-and-non-toxic-plants/philodendron-pertusum
Philodendron (Philodendron spp.)	References Used	https://plants.ces.ncsu.edu/plants/all/philodendron-selloum/
Philodendron (Philodendron spp.)	References Used	http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/PlantFinder/PlantFinderDetails.aspx?kempercode=b611
Pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus L.)	Other common names	"Carelessweed, Redroot, Red-rooted pigweed"
Pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus L.)	Description	"Pigweed is a stout, rapidly growing annual plant that can reach 3-4 feet tall. The stems are branched and hairy, and can be red to purple in color. The leaves of the plant are alternate, petiolate, ovate to lanceolate, and pointed at the apex. The flowers are light green and grow in dense spikes or panicles approximately 3-8 inches long. The taproot of redroot pigweed is bright red in color, and seeds are black and shiny."
Pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus L.)	Distribution	"A variety of pigweed species grow throughout North America, with redroot pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus) being the most common and typical of the genus. It can be found in cultivated and disturbed soils along roadsides and waste areas, and is also common in and around animal enclosures. Prostrate pigweed (A. blitoides), tumble pigweed (A. albus), and Palmer amaranth (A. palmeri) are also frequently seen and have similar characteristics to the redroot pigweed."
Pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poisoning occurs when the plant is ingested. Pigs and cattle should not be allowed to graze in areas where pigweed is present, and plants should be removed if seen growing in or near animal enclosures."
Pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus L.)	Control	"The plant spreads and grows quickly from wind-blown seeds, so effort should be taken to remove the plants from the desired areas before flowering and the areas should remain under close observation if mature plants are seen in the vicinity."
Pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus L.)	Toxic Principle	"Significant quantities of oxalates and nitrates may accumulate in the plant over time, and other currently unknown toxic substances may also be present."
Pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus L.)	Clinical Signs	"Swelling of and around the kidneys can be caused by oxalates in the plant, if present. Renal tubular nephrosis can occur and has most likely been the cause of death of affected animals in previous cases, and it has been seen even in cases where oxalates were not present implying that there is an unknown compound in the plant that is the cause. Nitrate poisoning can occur if the plant has accumulated nitrates over its lifetime."
Pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus L.)	Animals Affected	"Pigs, cattle"
Pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus L.)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	Description	"Poison hemlock is a coarse biennial herb with a smooth, purple-spotted, hollow stem and leaves like parsley. It grows 3 to 6 feet tall and in late summer has many small white flowers in showy umbels. Its leaves are extremely nauseating when tasted."
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	Description	"Although sometimes confused with water hemlock, poison hemlock can be distinguished by its leaves and its roots. The leaf veins of the poison hemlock run to the tips of the teeth; those of the water hemlock run to the notches between the teeth. The poison hemlock root is long, white, and fleshy. It is usually unbranched and can be easily distinguished from the root of water hemlock, which is made up of several tubers. "
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	Distribution	"Poison hemlock was introduced into North America from Europe, where it is native. It has become well established in all regions except desert. The plants are easily found along roadsides, on the banks of streams, ditches, and canals, and as a weed in fields. It is found in all parts of Illinois. "
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Animals allowed to graze pastures infested with this plant are most likely to be poisoned in early spring, when tender and succulent new leaves come from the root. Similar regrowth takes place in the early autumn. The root itself seems to be nearly harmless in spring, but later in the year all parts - roots, stem, leaves, and fruit - become extremely poisonous. It was the juice of poison hemlock with which the ancient Greeks killed Socrates. Many cases of human poisoning occur because the hemlock roots are mistaken for parsnips; the leaves, for parsley; and the roots and seeds, for anise. "
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	Control	Poison hemlock should be dug up and completely destroyed because it is dangerous to both animals and humans.
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	Toxic Principle	"Piperidine (nicotinic) alkaloids in Conium include coniceine, coniine, N-methyl coniine, conhydrine, and pseudoconhydrine. The alkaloid content is variable with the stage of development and the stage of reproduction of the plant. During the first year of growth, the plant alkaloid content tends to be low. Plants in the second year, however, have alkaloid contents of approximately 1% in all plant parts. The alkaloid content is somewhat higher after sunny weather, as compared to rainy weather. The highest concentration of alkaloids occur in the seeds which can contaminate cereal grains. Coniine (2-propylpiperidine) and N-methyl coniine progressively increase in flowers and fruits, while coniceine decreases during plant maturation. In the vegetative stage - i.e. early growth - coniceine (W'-2 propylpiperidine) is the predominant alkaloid. Coniceine and coniine are the primary teratogenic alkaloids of Conium."
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	Clinical Signs	"Susceptible species include cattle, pigs, elk, poultry, goats, sheep, and rabbits to some extent. Toxicosis has been experimentally reproduced in sheep and horses as well. Consumption of the plant may also affect the flavor and odor of the milk produced by the poisoned animal."
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	Clinical Signs	"Systemic effects: After having eaten poison hemlock, animals may lose their appetites, salivate excessively, bloat, and have a rapid but feeble pulse. They also show evidence of muscular incoordination and appear to have great abdominal pain. Other signs include muscle tremors, frequent urination and defecation, recumbency, mydriasis, and ""nervousness"" followed by severe depression. In animals that die, breathing ceases due to respiratory paralysis before cardiac arrest. Convulsions, which occur in water-hemlock poisoning, do not follow the eating of poison hemlock."
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	Clinical Signs	"Teratogenic effects: Birth defects due to ingesting poison hemlock occur in (at least) calves and piglets and may include crooked legs (crooked calf disease, arthrogryposis), cleft palate, and kinked tails. Arthrogrypotic skeletal malformations occur in calves when poison hemlock is ingested by pregnant cows between days 40 through 70 of gestation. Similar skeletal lesions occur in pigs between days 40 through 61 of gestation. Cleft palates can occur in piglets if pregnant swine ingest poison hemlock between days 30 through 45 of gestation."
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	Animals Affected	"Humans, cattle, birds, sheep, goats, pigs, horses, dogs, cats"
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	References Used	"Vetter, J.  ""Poison hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)."" Food and Chemical Toxicology. 42 (2004):1373-1382. "
Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum L.)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	Other common names	"(=Rhus toxicodendron L., Rhus radicans L.)"
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	Description	"Poison ivy is a perennial, woody plant that can grow as a climbing vine or as a low upright or trailing shrub. Leaves are split into three leaflets, alternate, glossy, hairless, and may be toothed or lobed. Leaves turn red in the fall. Climbing plants produce aerial roots that grasp the climbing surface, generally the bark of a tree. Flowers are small, greenish-white, and grow in hanging clusters. Fruits are yellowish-white waxy berries."
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	Distribution	"Poison ivy is native throughout the United States and southern Canada, although it is less common on the West Coast where poison oak is more prevalent. It grows in a wide variety of soils and locations including waste areas, woodlands, thickets, roadsides, clearings, and fencerows. "
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poison is typically delivered through skin contact with the plant, although indirect contact, such as touching an animal or object that has rubbed against the plant, will also deliver the toxin. All parts of the plant are poisonous, including the berries. Smoke from burning poison ivy can contain the toxin and affect people who are allergic to it."
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	Control	"Plants and root systems should be carefully dug up while using plastic gloves and keeping skin fully covered. Plants should be disposed of in a plastic bag, and should never be burned. Herbicides specifically for poison ivy can be purchased, but may not be cost-effective when dealing with a large infestation. Other pesticides such as glyphosate can be used selectively on poison ivy plants, but care should be used not to spread the pesticide to desired plants. Sheep and goats can eat poison ivy without any known problems, so allowing them to graze in areas infested with poison ivy can also help reduce the presence of the plant."
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	Toxic Principle	"Urushiol, an oily, resinous toxin found in all parts of the plant. Drying does not decrease toxicity."
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	Clinical Signs	"Redness of the skin, irritation, itching, swelling, blisters. Symptoms may be severe."
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	Animals Affected	"Humans. Animals are largely unaffected by poison ivy, so the primary concern is generally secondary contamination from an animal that has rubbed against the plant and is then touched by a person."
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	References Used	https://plants.ces.ncsu.edu/plants/all/toxicodendron-radicans/
Poison Ivy (Toxicodendron radicans (L.) Kuntze)	References Used	http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/gardens-gardening/your-garden/help-for-the-home-gardener/advice-tips-resources/pests-and-problems/weeds/poison-ivy.aspx
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Description	"Poke is an erect, branched, smooth herb with coarse, succulent, purplish stems; at maturity it is 3 to 10 feet tall. Its leaves, borne on short stalks, are alternately placed and ovate and are without teeth on their margins. Leaves grow up to about 5 inches long. Poke bears small white flowers on short flower stalks along separate branches at the growing tip of the plant and in the axils of the leaves. Each flower becomes a dark purple berry, flattened and spherical. The berries contain crimson juice and about 10 seeds each."
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Description	"A perennial, poke comes up year after year from an enormous taproot but it is spread only by seed."
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Distribution	"Poke is a herbaceous perennial and is native to North America. Though considered as a weed in Illinois, it is a source of food in some regions of the country. Its habitat ranges from the New England states to Florida and as far west as eastern Nebraska. Poke is frequent in open woods and occurs in waste places, along fence rows, about farmsteads, and in pastures if the soil is especially moist and rich."
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Cattle and sheep are the most susceptible species but poisoning occasionally occurs in horses, goats, and pigs. Animals may feed on poke plants, especially in the spring, when the plants are succulent. Where grass is short, the animals may browse so close as to get the top parts of the poke roots. Unless green herbage is very scarce later in the summer, animals will avoid the tops and berries."
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Control	"Animals should not be grazed in pastures infested with poke, especially in the spring or during dry, hot periods. The most certain way to eliminate poke from wooded pastures, where the plants are likely to be numerous and where it may be difficult or impossible to use chemical weed-killers, is to dig the individual plants out by their roots. As poke is spread only by seed, it is important to destroy the plant before flowering. "
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Toxic Principle	"Saponins, believed to be the primary toxic constituents, are present in the berry juice and other parts."
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Toxic Principle	"Other toxic constituents have also been identified including the alkaloid phytolaccine (in small amounts) and the alkaloid phytolaccotoxin, as well as a glycoprotein."
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Toxic Principle	"If used as food, the water in which it is boiled must be thrown away. "
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Clinical Signs	"The eating of nonfatal quantities of poke, perhaps of the shoots, may cause retching or vomiting after two hours or more. These signs may be followed by dyspnea, perspiration, spasms, severe purging, prostration, tremors, watery diarrhea (often bloody) and, sometimes, convulsions. If a fatal quantity is eaten, perhaps including roots, the above signs are followed by paralysis of the respiratory organs and other narcotic effects, culminating in the death of the poisoned animal."
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Clinical Signs	In Pigs:
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Clinical Signs	"Unsteadiness, inability to rise, retching."
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Clinical Signs	Jerking movements of the legs.
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Clinical Signs	Subnormal temperature.
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Clinical Signs	In Cattle:
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Clinical Signs	Same general signs plus a decrease in milk production. 
Poke or Pokeberry or Pokeweed (Phytolacca americana L.)(= P. decandra L.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, swine"
Purple Mint (Perilla frutescens)	Description	"Purple mint is an annual herb that is sometimes grown ornamentally or to be used as an ingredient in certain dishes. The plant generally grows to be 1-3 feet tall and is erect and often branching. The stem of the plant is usually a burgundy color (though sometimes green) and hairy, and the leaves are simple, opposite, and are green or purple. The edges of the leaves are coarsely serrated, and the leaves can grow to be up to 5 inches wide and 7 inches long, wider at the base and narrowing towards the tip. The flowers are small and vary in color from white to purple, and grow in clusters on flowering branches of the plant."
Purple Mint (Perilla frutescens)	Distribution	"Purple mint is found in the southeastern to midwestern United States. It can grow as a weed in the wild and can pop up anywhere in a pasture, although it prefers semi-shaded locations such as near buildings, the edges of wooded areas, and near fencerows."
Purple Mint (Perilla frutescens)	Conditions of Poisoning	"All parts of the plant are poisonous, but particularly the flowering branches. Dried plants can still be toxic, but the majority of the risk comes from consuming the plant while fresh, especially if flowers or fruit are present. Poisoning is mainly a concern during the late summer and early fall when the plant is flowering and other grasses and forages may be in short supply. Cattle normally do not feed on purple mint unless other food is not available, so it is important to have a ready supply of quality feed on hand for the animals to eat instead during this time of the year, and grazing in infested pastures should be limited during the flowering period."
Purple Mint (Perilla frutescens)	Control	"Effort should be made to look out for and remove the plant in late spring and early summer. It is difficult to control the plant in late summer and early fall, which is also when it becomes the most dangerous to livestock. Plants should be removed before flowering as the flowers are the most toxic part of the plant and to also prevent seed production and dispersal. Mowing the plants before seeds are produced will help prevent further spread as well. Avoid creating feed from areas infested with purple mint."
Purple Mint (Perilla frutescens)	Toxic Principle	Ketones.
Purple Mint (Perilla frutescens)	Clinical Signs	"Acute pulmonary emphysema, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), edema, death."
Purple Mint (Perilla frutescens)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, horses, ruminants"
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)	Description	"Rhododendron is a genus of a shrub with about 800 species worldwide. Its ovate evergreen or deciduous leaves are alternate, 1/2 - 8 inches in length depending on variety, with smooth untoothed margins. They are dark green with a glossy upper surface and a dull underside. Large trusses of bell-shaped flowers bloom from spring to early summer. Plants are available with flowers in colors such as white, purple, deep rose, red, yellow, and orange. Rhododendron and the closely related azalea have been hybridized for many uses in gardens and rarely reach above 3-5 feet tall in northern states including Illinois. "
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)	Distribution	"In Illinois, most species found are ornamental types that usually thrive in protected areas of gardens. Tall, wild varieties can reach over 35 feet high, and are found throughout the coastal mountain ranges from New York to Georgia. Designated as West Virginia's state flower, rhododendrons are particularly abundant in the Great Smoky and the Blue Ridge mountains. Species in the Pacific northwest from northern California to British Columbia vary in heights. "
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"All parts of the plant, but especially the foliage, contain the poison, and consuming two or three leaves may produce severe toxicosis. Sucking flowers free of nectar may produce serious illness. Rhododendrons are more likely to retain green leaves year round than are most other plants, and therefore most cases of poisoning occur in the winter and early spring, when other forage is unavailable. "
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)	Toxic Principle	"All parts of this plant contain toxic resins (andromedotoxins, now commonly referred to as grayanotoxin) with the leaves being the most potent. Grayanotoxin produces gastrointestinal irritation with some hemorrhage, secondary aspiration pneumonia, and sometimes renal tubular damage and mild liver degeneration. "
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)	Clinical Signs	"Clinical signs usually appear within 6 hours of ingestion. Affected animals may experience anorexia, depression, acute digestive upset, hypersalivation, nasal discharge, epiphora, projectile vomiting, frequent defecation, and repeated attempts to swallow. There also may be weakness, incoordination, paralysis of the limbs, stupor, and depression. Aspiration of vomit is common in ruminants and results in dyspnea and often death. Pupillary reflexes may be absent. Coma precedes death. Animals may remain sick for more than 2 days and gradually recover."
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)	Animals Affected	"Dogs, cats, horses, cattle, sheep, goats, humans (from consumption of the plant, rhododendron tea, and/or honey made from rhododendron pollen)."
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)	References Used	https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control/toxic-and-non-toxic-plants/rhododendron
Rhododendron (Rhododendron spp.)	References Used	https://csuvth.colostate.edu/poisonous_plants/Plants/Details/111
Rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum)	Description	"Rhubarb is a perennial herb that is generally kept as a cultivated plant for use as a food item or as an ornamental plant either indoors or in a landscape. The leaves of the plant are large and heart-shaped with a thick, reddish petiole. Flowers are green to white, small, and grow in a dense panicle on the end of a flowering stem. Fruits are winged and reddish-brown when mature. Roots are large and fleshy."
Rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum)	Distribution	"As a domestic plant, rhubarb is found all across the United States in homes, gardens, farms, and landscapes. Rhubarb is sometimes found in the wild as an escaped plant, and prefers moist, fertile soils."
Rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum)	Conditions of Poisoning	"The toxin is transmitted through consumption of the leaves of the plant. The leaves are toxic when raw and the leaf blade remains toxic even after cooking and should never be eaten. The leaf stem contains less of the toxin and is generally safe to eat after being cooked, although consuming very large amounts (multiple pounds) of the cooked stems can cause symptoms of poisoning. Cooking the rhubarb with calcium carbonate will also help neutralize the toxin by converting the soluble calcium oxalates to insoluble calcium oxalates."
Rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum)	Toxic Principle	Soluble calcium oxalates.
Rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum)	Clinical Signs	"Kidney failure, tremors, salivation, abdominal cramps, burning sensation in mouth and throat, headache, weakness, nausea, vomiting, coma and death if large quantities eaten."
Rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum)	Animals Affected	"Humans, livestock, dogs, cats, horses"
Rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
Rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum)	References Used	https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control/toxic-and-non-toxic-plants/rhubarb
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Other common names	Eupatorium urticaefolium
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Description	"White snakeroot is an erect, branched herb usually about 3 feet tall but varying from 1 to 5 feet. It has slender, round stems and branches bearing pointed, oval, oppositely placed leaves. These leaves, 3 to 5 inches long and petioled, are sharply toothed on the margins. Each leaf has 3 main veins that show prominently on the underside. The roots are fibrous, coarse, and shallow. "
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Description	Snakeroot with Flowers
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Description	"In late summer, numerous small heads of minute white flowers appear at the top of the stem and the ends of the branches. These flower heads, except that they are white, are almost exactly like the flower heads of the familiar ageratum of gardens. Later the flowers are replaced in the heads by small black seeds each with a crown of soft white hairs."
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Description	"Because the leaves of white snakeroot resemble those of the nettle, other plants with nettle-like leaves are often mistaken for it. Two such plants are the nettle-leaved sage and the nettle-leaved vervain. Even without flowers or fruit, these plants can be easily distinguished from white snakeroot. The nettle-leaved sage, a rare plant in some southern Illinois counties, has square stems; white snakeroot stems are round. The nettle-leaved vervain, a common weed throughout Illinois, has lance-shaped leaves; white snakeroot leaves are broad at the base but narrow quickly in a wedge-shaped part to the petiole."
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Distribution	"White snakeroot is found in woods of all types and along streams in wooded pastures throughout the Midwest. It persists after woods are cut, and often may be found many years after the land has been cleared, although usually in such areas it occurs only as scattered unthrifty plants. In prairie regions, it is not often found except in the woods bordering streams."
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Conditions of Poisoning	"An animal may die from eating either a large amount of white snakeroot at one time or small amounts over a long period. The eating of small quantities more or less continuously gives rise to the animal disease known as trembles. It is also the cause of the well-known and much-feared milk sickness of man -- a disease that is contracted from drinking milk or eating milk products from poisoned cows. Milk sickness claimed thousands of lives in the early 1800s, with perhaps the most well-known victim being Abraham Lincoln's mother. Nursing calves and lambs may die from mothers' milk that is contaminated with snakeroot even though the mother animals show no signs of poisoning. Cattle, horses, and sheep are the animals most often poisoned. "
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Control	"During the dry period of late summer, animals should not be pastured in woods or fields where there is white snakeroot. If the pasture is known to be infested, animals should be moved out of it within the first few days of July and should not be returned to it until the following year."
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Control	"Eradication of white snakeroot is not easy. Chemical weed-killers cannot be used satisfactorily, because they endanger trees and other plants of the pasture. The best way to reduce the number of the plants is to pull them out by the roots and burn them; the best time to do this is in September, when the plants are more easily identified by their white blossoms. If the plants are pulled after a hard rain while the ground is soft, the shallow roots come out readily."
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Toxic Principle	"The apparent toxic principle in white snakeroot has been given the trivial name tremetol. It has been described as a fat-soluble, high molecular weight alcohol."
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Toxic Principle	"Crude tremetol, was later shown to be separable into a toxic ketone fraction (61%) (tested in goldfish) and a nontoxic sterol fraction (39%). The ketone fraction was later separated into tremetone, dihydrotremetone, and hydroxytremetone. These may all be components of a fragile tremetol molecule."
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Clinical Signs	White snakeroot can endanger the lives of persons and animals other than those that have actually eaten the plant. Consumption of the plant may also affect the flavor and odor of the milk produced by the poisoned animal.
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Clinical Signs	In Cattle and Sheep: 
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Clinical Signs	"Although animals that have fed on white snakeroot may be listless and somewhat inactive at first, the first noticeable manifestations of poisoning are loss of weight and trembling following exercise. Trembling is especially marked in the muzzle and legs. As poisoning progresses, cattle lose appetite, become constipated, lose weight, and gradually become weaker until they are not able to stand. Additional signs may include a peculiar odor to the breath and urine, excessive salivation, and quickened, difficult breathing. Later, complete relaxation without tremors and coma are seen, with death following in 2-10 days."
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Clinical Signs	The clinical signs that are exhibited by poisoned sheep are similar to those shown by cattle. Death may occur in a few days or may be delayed.
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Clinical Signs	"In cases of chronic poisoning, post-mortem examination generally reveals extensive degenerative changes in the liver and kidney."
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Clinical Signs	In Horses:
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Clinical Signs	"The onset of clinical signs in white snakeroot poisoned horses is within 2 days to 3 weeks after initial ingestion (usually after at least several days of ingestion). The major effects are related to congestive heart failure. Tremors are inconsistently observed in horses with white snakeroot poisoning. Horses may stand with legs wide apart. Sweating may be evident especially between rear legs, and stumbling in the rear legs may be noted when horses are turned. Severe depression, bloody urine, and/or choking may also occur. Sometimes swelling is present in the lower neck area, near the thoracic inlet. They may exhibit a jugular pulse and a rapid heart rate. Changes in electrocardiogram include increased heart rate, ST elevation, and variable QRS complexes, and ventricular premature beats. Cardiac arrhythmias are often present."
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Clinical Signs	In Guinea Pigs:
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Clinical Signs	"The refusal to eat by the animal is the first sign, followed by listlessness and crouching with half-closed eyes. The hair becomes rough. Muscular tremors may not be noticeable, but complete lack of muscular coordination and stupor precede death. (White snakeroot poisoning, by R. Graham and V.M. Michael. Circular #436, University of Illinois College of Agriculture,1935.)"
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	Animals Affected	"Cattle, sheep, horses, guinea pigs"
"Snakeroot, White (Eupatorium rugosum Hout.)"	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	Description	"St. John's Wort is an herbaceous perennial that is erect and grows up to 3 feet tall. It has many opposite branches and an extensive rhizomatous root system. The leaves are opposite, elliptic to oblong, and may have tiny, dot-like translucent or black glands. The flowers are bright yellow, star-shaped with five petals that have black dots on the margins, and have many stamens."
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	Distribution	"St. John's Wort is found as a weed throughout most of North America, but it is particularly common in the northwest. It grows in dry, disturbed soils such as roadsides, fields, and waste spaces. It is also intentionally cultivated for use as an herbal medicine to treat depression, anxiety, and insomnia."
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poisoning occurs after the plant is ingested and the animal is exposed to sunlight. Drying does not inactivate the toxin, so ingesting hay made from St. John's Wort can also produce symptoms. The young plants are as poisonous as the mature plants and seem to be more palatable to livestock. The amount of toxin present in the plant is dependent on the growing conditions of the plant and can vary."
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	Control	"Animals should not be allowed to graze in areas where St. John's Wort is present, particularly animals with light skin or which lack a heavy layer of fur that will block sunlight."
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	Toxic Principle	"Hypericin, which is a photoreactive pigment contained in the glands found on the leaves and flowers. The highest concentration of hypericin is found in the black glands, while the transparent glands contain protohypericin. Poisoning in cattle occurs after consuming about 1% of their body weight, while sheep must eat about 4% of their body weight to develop symptoms. "
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	Clinical Signs	"Photosensitization, skin reddening, swelling, ulcers, sloughing of skin. Symptoms only develop when the poisoned animal is exposed to sunlight, and are generally limited to areas of the animal that are lightly pigmented or do not have thick fur to block sunlight."
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	Animals Affected	"Humans, cattle, sheep, horses, cats, dogs"
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	References Used	"Knight, A. P., & Walter, R. G. (2001). A guide to plant poisoning of animals in North America. Jackson, Wyo.: Teton NewMedia."
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	References Used	https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control/toxic-and-non-toxic-plants/st-johns-wort
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	References Used	http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/PlantFinder/PlantFinderDetails.aspx?kempercode=e198
St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)	References Used	https://csuvth.colostate.edu/poisonous_plants/Plants/Details/43
Tulip (Tulipa spp.)	Description	"Tulips are a popular spring ornamental that are often grown as an indoor or garden plant. The leaves of the plant are long, narrow, and alternate. The flowers often grow singularly and have six tepals that can be any of a wide range of colors except for true blue. The tepals often grow in the shape of a cup, although bowl, goblet, and star shapes also exist, and the edges of the tepals may have ruffles or fringe. The plant grows from a papery, teardrop-shaped bulb that resembles and is sometimes mistaken for an onion."
Tulip (Tulipa spp.)	Distribution	"Tulips can be found as cultivated plants across North America, but the plants can occasionally be found naturalized in the wild as well. Tulipa sylvestris can sometimes be found in fields, waste areas, and roadsides in the northeastern portion of the United States, and Tulipa clusiana has been seen in the southwestern United States in California."
Tulip (Tulipa spp.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Poisoning can occur after consumption of the flowers, stem, or bulb of the plant, although the bulb has the highest concentration of the toxin. Skin contact can sometimes cause irritation, although effects are usually quite mild."
Tulip (Tulipa spp.)	Toxic Principle	Tulipalin A and B.
Tulip (Tulipa spp.)	Clinical Signs	"Vomiting, hypersalivation, depression, diarrhea, stomach pains. Skin irritation is characterized by tingling, redness, and blisters that may spread beyond the point of contact, but effects are usually mild and brief."
Tulip (Tulipa spp.)	Animals Affected	"Humans, dogs, cats, horses"
Tulip (Tulipa spp.)	References Used	"Burrows, George E., & Tyrl, Ronald J. (2013). Toxic plants of North America. Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell."
Tulip (Tulipa spp.)	References Used	https://plants.ces.ncsu.edu/plants/all/tulipa-spp/
Tulip (Tulipa spp.)	References Used	http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/PlantFinder/PlantFinderDetails.aspx?kempercode=c252
Tulip (Tulipa spp.)	References Used	https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control/toxic-and-non-toxic-plants/tulip
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Description	"This 2-10 feet tall herbaceous perennial or biennial native of the Umbelliferae family is very difficult to separate from other species of the same family. It has a tuberous root with 2-8 oblong tubers which are 1.5-3 inches long and about 1/2 inch thick at the thickest point near the middle and stem end. The purple-streaked stems are stout and erect with much branching. The stems are solid when very young, but become hollow with nodes where the leaflets are attached. The stems are chambered with horizontal diaphragm of pith tissue which are more closely arranged at the base of the stem. The horizontal plates of piths are most easily visible by cutting the stem base lengthwise."
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Description	"The alternate leaves are pinnately 2-3 times compound. The leaves of most species are lanceolate, 2-5 inches long, and sharply toothed. The base of the long petioles clasp the stem."
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Description	"Flowers are white and tiny (no more than 1/8 inch across), have 5 petals, and appear in loose compound umbels at branch ends in mid summer. Umbels measure from 2 to 8 inches across and become somewhat spherical in fruit. Fruits are ovoid and ribbed on the outer surface."
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Description	New growth begins from tubers as well as from seeds. 
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Distribution	"The water hemlock occurs throughout the state of Illinois. It is occasionally encountered in wet pastures and meadows and frequently in and along ditches, in the low ground near streams, in low woods, and around ponds and lakes. "
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Water hemlock is among the most poisonous plants in Illinois. Although the leaves and fruit, either green or dried in hay, can be eaten without danger, a relatively small amount of the tuber will kill a cow in a short time. There is little danger during summer and fall as stock are not likely to browse on the tall coarse plants. But in early spring, the livestock will eat the young leaves and stems sprouting from the ground, and in doing so may pull the shallow tubers out of the soft wet ground and eat them also. "
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Control	"In the early spring livestock should not be allowed to graze in meadows infested with water hemlock, for the young shoots are then springing up and animals can easily pull the poisonous tubers from the wet, soft ground."
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Control	"Pastures should be free of this plant. It is easiest to remove plants in the early spring. If the plant is not to be removed, it can be kept from spreading by mowing the tops before the seeds form. If extensive marshy areas become infested, it may be necessary to drain the land and cultivate it for several years before animals can again be safely pastured there. "
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Toxic Principle	"The toxic principle of water hemlock has been called cicutoxin and is a resinoid. It is a thick, yellow liquid with a carrot-like or raw parsnip-like odor. It is concentrated especially in the roots and the base of the stem at or below ground surface. The roots are toxic all year. Young leaves are nearly as toxic as roots, but mature leaves have been consumed in summer and autumn without associated problems."
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Toxic Principle	"Ingestion of two ounces of water hemlock tubers can kill a sheep, and eight to ten ounces of mature plant can kill a cow."
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Clinical Signs	"The clinical signs of water hemlock poisoning often follow a rather definite sequence. Frothing at the mouth may occur first, but this is quickly followed by uneasiness, frenzied movements, and other evidence of intense abdominal pain. Jerking of the muscles, twisting backward of the head and neck (opisthotonus), together with stiffening of the limbs, dilated pupils, and rolling eyeballs are followed by spasms of the diaphragm (in some species this may be associated with vomiting), convulsions, and death. The poison acts so quickly that the affected animal may die 15 minutes after the first abnormalities are noticed. "
Water Hemlock (Cicuta maculata L.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, sheep"
Wild Onion (Allium spp.)	Description	"Wild onion (A. validum or A. canadense) is a bulbous herb of the Amaryllis family and is a close relative of cultivated onion (Allium cepa L.). It has a distinct onion odor. It has slender grass-like leaves and reaches about 2 feet in height when flowers appear in late summer. Leaves are narrow, long, and with parallel edges arising from the small underground bulb. Flowers, varying in color, depending on the species,  from white to pink, appear at the top of a leafless stem and eventually become bulblets which drop to the ground and propagate. "
Wild Onion (Allium spp.)	Description	It is thought that the name Chicago is derived from the smell of wild onions:
Wild Onion (Allium spp.)	Description	"""Indians, mainly Potawatomi, who were the most powerful tribe around the south end of Lake Michigan, hunted, traded furs, and occasionally camped in the area they called ""Checagou,"" evidently referring to the garlic wild onion smell which permeated the air."" -- Encyclopedia of Illinois, 2nd. Edition. Somerset Publishers, New York, 1994. p. 138."
Wild Onion (Allium spp.)	Distribution	Wild onion is found in meadows and woodlands in the northeastern and north central United States. Other species grow throughout the western United States. Several species of wild onion are found in Illinois with Allium canadense found in all counties. 
Wild Onion (Allium spp.)	Conditions of Poisoning	"Cattle are susceptible to onion poisoning and eating large amounts of this plant can cause death in this species. In areas where culled onions are grown commercially, they can be fed to cattle with few problems when the feed is mixed with ample amounts of other feed components. Poisoning may occur when cool spring weather delays growth of grass and wild onions are available in comparatively large amounts for cattle to graze. Horses and sheep are less susceptible, with goats being the least susceptible. In some cases, sheep may eat onions and show nothing more than slight hemoglobinemia. "
Wild Onion (Allium spp.)	Control	"Due to its easily-separable bulbs and thin, waxy leaves, wild onion can be difficult to remove both by hand pulling and through the use of herbicides. Using a trowel to dig up the entire bulb and roots can be effective and can help reduce the number of bulb and bulblets left in the ground. Steps to remove the plants should be taken during late fall in November and again in late winter/early spring before new plants are produced in March."
Wild Onion (Allium spp.)	Toxic Principle	"Both wild and cultivated onions contain the same toxic principle, N-propyl disulfide which primarily affects erythrocytes. The principle effects are related to hemolysis (rupture of red blood cells). This is believed to be secondary to oxidant-associated effects, and Heinz bodies may sometimes be evident in red blood cells. Other compounds are believed to be responsible for the lacrimator (tear producing) and antithrombotic (anti-clotting) effects associated with onions and garlic. Various sulfur-containing metabolites are probably responsible for the odors associated with ingestion of onions and garlic."
Wild Onion (Allium spp.)	Clinical Signs	"Urine discoloration may vary from wine red to almost black. Muscle weakness, rapid breathing, and a rapid heart rate may be noted if hemolysis is sufficiently severe. Some animals may be icteric (jaundiced) and/or have a characteristic onion odor to the breath. Loss of weight and appetite may also occur. Although severe toxicoses may be lethal, doses may cause only taste and odor problems in the milk of dairy cows."
Wild Onion (Allium spp.)	Animals Affected	"Cattle, cats, dogs, horses, sheep, goats"
